STM


- you can validate the quality of your results by directly loooking at the image. quick feedback
-- ofc there is post-processing, but 
-- you know when you have a good tip immediatly

- STM can be used to manipulate atoms on an individual basis!
(If the distance between the tip and
the surface is decreased, the tip
can be used to drag atoms along
the surface)

- THEORETICAL MINIMUM

exponential decay of tunneling -> High sensitivity

There is tunneling even with no bias voltage.
Bias voltage is applied to break the equilibrium and generate a net current.


- MEASUREMENT MODES
-- constant current imaging (most common)
---  the tip scans across the sample surface while a feedback loop adjusts its vertical position (tip-sample
distance) to maintain a constant tunneling current (typically around 100 pA)


FUTURE:
Recently, an STM has even been used to probe the quantum superposition of electrons.



The STM works by moving a
sub-millimetre conducting tip over
a surface. There is a small vacuum
gap of a few ångströms between the
tip and the surface such that electrons can tunnel through, creating a
current. To keep the current constant
over the roughness of the surface,
the height of the tip must be adjusted.
Thus, recording the movement of the
tip enables the creation of a 3D map
of the surface on the atomic scale.


The STM is a mechanically positioned, electrically sensitive kind of nanofinger
for sensing, addressing, and handling individually selected atoms, molecules, and other tiny objects and for
modifying condensed matter on an atomic scale




local probe: A tool that looks at a material in a particular location. small-sized objects, usually the very end of a sharp tip

1979 Invention of STM Gerd Binnig and Heine Rohrer at IBM labs. 1986. Nobel prize.



WHAT IS IT GOOD FOR?
- can be used in air -> cheap 

COMPARE WITH AFM
- AFM is more mechanical, it relies on the interatomic forces, via deformation or bending of cantilever
- in STM, it is tunnelin current that quantifies the interaction






















