Nano Superconducting Quantum Interference device: a powerful
tool for nanoscale investigations
Carmine Granata and Antonio Vettoliere
Institute of Applied Sciences and Intelligent Systems “E. Caianiello”- National Research Council,
I-80078 Pozzuoli (Napoli), Italy
Abstract:
The magnetic sensing at nanoscale level is a promising and interesting research topic of
nanoscience. Indeed, magnetic imaging is a powerful tool for probing biological, chemical and
physical systems. The study of small spin cluster, like magnetic molecules and nanoparticles, single
electron, cold atom clouds, is one of the most stimulating challenges of applied and basic research
of the next years. In particular, the magnetic nanoparticle investigation plays a fundamental role for
the modern material science and its relative technological applications like ferrofluids, magnetic
refrigeration and biomedical applications, including drug delivery, hyper-thermia cancer treatment
and magnetic resonance imaging contrast-agent. Actually, one of the most ambitious goals of the
high sensitivity magnetometry is the detection of elementary magnetic moment or spin. In this
framework, several efforts have been devoted to the development of a high sensitivity magnetic
nanosensor pushing sensing capability to the individual spin level. Among the different magnetic
sensors, Superconducting QUantum Interference Devices (SQUIDs) exhibit an ultra high sensitivity
and are widely employed in numerous applications. Basically, a SQUID consists of a
superconducting ring (sensitive area) interrupted by two Josephson junctions. In the recent years, it
has been proved that the magnetic response of nano-objects can be effectively measured by using a
SQUID with a very small sensitive area (nanoSQUID). In fact, the sensor noise, expressed in terms
of the elementary magnetic moment (spin or Bohr magneton), is linearly dependent on the SQUID
loop side length. For this reason, SQUIDs have been progressively miniaturized in order to improve
the sensitivity up to few spin per unit of bandwidth. With respect to other techniques, nanoSQUIDs
offer the advantage of direct measurement of magnetization changes in small spin systems. In this
1

review, we focus on nanoSQUIDs and its applications. In particular, we will discuss the
motivations, the theoretical aspects, the fabrication techniques, the different nanoSQUIDs and the
relative nanoscale applications.
Contents:
1. Introduction
1.1 Fundamentals of a Superconducting QUantum Interference Device (SQUID)
1.2 Working principle of a SQUID
1.3 SQUID characteristic computation
1.4 Magnetic noise and energy sensitivity
1.5 Detection of physical quantities
1.5.1 Magnetic field measurements
1.5.2 Magnetic gradient measurements
1.5.3 Current and voltage measurements
1.5.4. Superconducting flux transformer design
1.5.5 High spatial resolution measurements
1.6 Main SQUID applications
2. NanoSQUIDs: fundamentals, theoretical elements and spin sensitivity.
2.1 NanoSQUID: origin and motivations
2.2 Magnetic moment and spin sensitivity
2.3 A simply way to make a nanoSQUID
2.4 Theoretical aspects of Dayem bridges
2.5 NanoSQUID performance predictions
2.6 Flux coupling and spin sensitivity computation
3. NanoSQUIDs: fabrication and performance
3.1 Nanofabrication techniques
3.1.1 Electron Beam Litography (EBL)
2

3.1.2 Focused Ion Beam (FIB)
3.2 NanoSQUIDs based on Dayem nanobridge
3.3 NanoSQUIDs based on sandwich type nanojunctions
3.4 NanoSQUIDs for scanning microscopy: nanoscale 3D pick-up loop, nanoSQUID on a tip.
3.5 High critical temperature superconductor based nanoSQUIDs
3.6 Other nanoSQUID types
4. NanoSQUID applications
4.1 Measurement methods
4.1.1 Switching current measurements and cold mode
4.1.2 Magnetic flux feedback method for increase the linear dynamic range
4.1.3 Attachment and manipulation of magnetic nano-objects on a nanoSQUID
4.2 Nanomagnetism applications
4.3 Other applications:
4.3.1 Scanning magnetic microscopy with an ultra high spatial resolution
4.3.2 Nanoscale electromechanical system (NEMS) resonator readout
4.3.3 Single photon and macromolecule detection
4.3.4 Nanoelectronics and Quantum computing
5. Summary and conclusions
References
Keywords: nanoSQUID, Josephson junction, Dayem nanobridge, Magnefic flux noise, Spin
sensitivity, Electron beam lithography, Focused ion beam, Magnetic nanoparticles.

3

1. Introduction
Direct current Superconducting QUantum Interference Device (dc SQUID) is the most sensitive
magnetic flux and field detector known so far [1-4]. Due to the low operating temperature and the
quantum working principle, a SQUID exhibits an equivalent energy sensitivity that approaches the
quantum limit. The ultra high SQUID sensitivity has also allowed, in the last years, very interesting
experiments like the detection of axion dark-matter [5], the dynamical Casimir effect [6], the
Majorana fermions [7] investigations, the Josephson heat interferometer [8], the Sunyaev Zeldovich
effect [9], effects of the quantum gravity [10] and the detection of the primordial gravitational
waves [11]. Thanks to their unique properties, SQUID devices are widely used in several
applications like biomagnetism, magnetic microscopy, non-destructive evaluation, geophysics,
astrophysics, quantum information, particle physics and, recently, also in nanoscience.
In the last years, one of the most ambitious goals of the high sensitivity magnetometry is the
investigation of the magnetic properties of nanoscale objects like nanoparticles, magnet molecules,
cold atom clouds, nanowire, single electronic spin [12,13]. These systems have been investigated
using a wide variety of methods such as Hall effect in miniaturized semiconductor bars [14], spinpolarized scanning tunnelling microscopy [15], magnetic resonance force microscopy [16], electron
holography [17] and, more recently, the promising diamond magnetometer based on nitrogenvacancy centres [18-21]. Among them, the nano-sized SQUID (nanoSQUID) [22-24] is one of the
most promising sensors for nanoscale applications because it exhibits an ultra high magnetic
moment sensitivity reaching few Bohr magnetons or spins per unit of bandwidth and allows direct
magnetization changes detection in small nano-object systems. Recently, great efforts have been
focused to the development of nano-SQUIDs, making such a nanosensor a powerful tool to study
the magnetic properties of the nanoparticles at a microscopic level.
In this article, we present a review of nanoSQUIDs and its applications. The first section will be
focused on the basic principles of SQUID and the main characteristics of the quantum device. This
is very useful to understand the following sections on nanoSQUIDs. The state of the art of
4

nanoSQUIDs will be presented in the second and third section. It will include the motivations, the
theoretical aspects, the fabrication techniques and an overview of various nanoSQUIDs. In the last
section, the nanoscale applications and the conclusions will be addressed.
1.1 Fundamentals of a SQUID
A dc SQUID sensor is a converter of magnetic flux into an electrical current or a voltage having an
extremely low magnetic flux noise. Basically, it consists of a superconducting ring interrupted by
two Josephson junctions. As the next section will show, the current flowing into the SQUID or the
voltage across it is a periodic function of the external magnetic flux treading the SQUID detector
with a period equal to a fundamental physical constant Φ0=h/2e=2.07x10-15 Wb (h is the Plank
constant and e is the charge of the electron).
Why is it so sensitive? The superconductivity is one of the most spectacular manifestations of the
macroscopic quantum physics. Being a macroscopic object as a superconductor described by a
wave function, there are macroscopic physical quantities related to quantum physical constant. In
the case of the SQUID, the voltage across it (few tens of µV) is related to the quantum flux that is a
very small quantity from a macroscopic point of view. Moreover, by using suitable readout
electronics, the SQUID can measure a magnetic flux less than 10-6 Φ0 per bandwidth unit, resulting
in an ultra low noise sensor.
Jaklevic et al [25] gave the first demonstration of quantum interference in a device by using two
thin-film Josephson junctions connected in parallel on a superconducting loop. Few years later,
Zimmerman and Silver [26] proposed a device consisting of a superconducting ring interrupted by a
single Josephson junction (rf SQUID). As no leads are attached to the device, in this case the loop is
inductively coupled to a resonant tank circuit that is excited at its resonant frequency by a radiofrequency current. The amplitude of the oscillating voltage across the tank circuit is periodic in the
magnetic flux treading the rf SQUID loop with a period of Φ0.

5

For about ten year from its discovery, the rf SQUID had a major impact because it required only a
single junction which was easier to manufacture than a pair of junctions. The invention of a reliable
and reproducible Josephson device technology based on Nb/AlOx/Nb multilayer and the
development of a suitable dc SQUID design based on the planar SQUID with an integrated
multiturn input coil ensured the dominance of the dc SQUID which offered sensitivity higher than
rf SQUID one. Nowadays, most of applications employ dc SQUID based on both low and high
critical temperature (Tc) superconductors. Only high Tc rf SQUIDs have viable applications
prospects as their sensitivity is comparable to high Tc dc SQUID and are almost always single-layer
devices.
Beside the magnetic flux, a SQUID can detect with an unprecedented sensitivity also other physical
quantities as magnetic field, current, voltage, displacements, etc, if converted in a magnetic flux by
using suitable flux transformer circuits [27].
In this section we will provide the fundamentals of SQUIDs (principle of operation, the noise
properties, the main applications), while an exhaustive analysis can be found in the references [1-4].
1.2 Working principle of a SQUID
The operation principle of a SQUID is based on the Josephson effect [28] and the flux quantization
in a superconducting ring [29]. In 1962, Brian Josephson predicted that a supercurrent could tunnel
through an insulating barrier separating two superconducting electrodes. A Josephson junction is
schematically represented by two superconductor separated by a thin insulation barrier (Fig.1). If
the junction is biased with a dc current, the voltage across it remains zero up to a current value
called Josephson critical current I0 due to the cooper pair-tunnelling trough the insulation barrier.
This so-called dc Josephson effect is due to the overlap of the macroscopic wave functions in the
barrier region (Fig.1).

6

Fig. 1. Scheme of a Josephson junction. A thin insulator barrier (few nm) separates the two
superconductors. The overlap of the macroscopic wave functions allows the tunnelling of the
Cooper pair.
When the bias current is greater than I0, the junction switches in a resistive state where the tunnel is
due to the single electrons.
The fundamental equations of the Josephson effect are:
I = I 0 sin ϕ

(1)

∂ϕ 2e
= V
∂t
h

(2)

Where I0 is the critical current and ϕ the phase difference between the macroscopic wave functions
of the cooper pairs relative to the two superconductors and V is the voltage across the junction. If
the voltage across the junction is constant, the phase difference is a linear function of the time

ϕ = ( 2e/h) V ·t + ϕ0, which substituted in the first Josephson equation gives an oscillating current at
non zero voltage: I = I 0sin(2πf t +ϕ0) where f= (2e/h)V/2π (486.6 MHz/µV). This effect, known as
Josephson ac effect [30], has been successfully employed in metrology and several other
applications [2-4]. An exhaustive review of the Josephson effect can be found in reference [31]. An
overlap of the macroscopic wave functions of the two superconductors which implies the Josephson
effect can be also obtained by using different structures such as Dayem bridges (nanoconstrictions

7

of superconductor), point of contacts, by-crystal and step edge grain boundary junctions, normal or
semiconductor barrier based junctions etc. [32,33].
The magnetic flux quantization states that the magnetic flux treading a superconducting loop exists
only in multiples of the flux quantum (Φ=nΦ0) [29]. Physically, it is due to the Meissner effect
[34], a peculiar effect of the superconductivity, which involves the magnetic flux expulsion in a
superconductor when it moves from the normal state to a superconducting one in presence of an
external magnetic field. In the case of a superconducting ring, the discrete quantities of flux can be
trapped into the ring rather than expelled as in a continuous superconductor. This magnetic flux is
sustained by a persistent circulating current inside the ring, J=Φ/L where L is the inductance of the
ring and Φ=B·S is the applied magnetic flux. The flux quantization within a superconducting ring
can be explained also assuming that the macroscopic wave function must be single valued
(Sommerfield-Bohr quantization) [26].
The typical SQUID configuration is schematically shown in the Fig. 2. The two Josephson
junctions are in a parallel configuration, so the critical current of the SQUID is Ic=I1+I2 or Ic=2I0 if
the Josephson junctions are identical. As will be shown below, in presence of an external magnetic
field treading the SQUID loop, Ic oscillates with a period of one flux quantum. This is due to the
interference of superconducting wave functions in the two arms of the SQUID and are analogue to
the two slit interference in optics. It is the basis of the working principle of a SQUID.
1.3 SQUID characteristic computation
Fig. 2 reports the equivalent electrical circuit of a SQUID obtained in the framework of the
resistively shunted junction model (RCSJ) [35,36]. In this model, the Josephson junction has a
critical current I0 and is in parallel with a capacitance C and resistance R having a current noise
source associated to it. The R-value is related to the hysteresis in the current-voltage (I-V)
characteristic of a junction or a SQUID. In particular if the Stewart-McCumber parameter

β c =2 π I c CR 2 / Φ 0 <1 there is no hysteresis [36].
8

Fig.2 Equivalent electric circuit of a dc-SQUID in the framework of the resistively and capacitively
shunted model of a Josephson junction [35].
It can be shown that the flux quantization in the presence of a superconducting ring including two
Josephson junctions can be write as [31]:

ϕ1 − ϕ 2 = 2π

Φ + LJ
Φ
= 2π e
Φ0
Φ0

(3)

Where ϕ1 and ϕ2 are the phase differences of the superconducting wave functions across the two
junctions. Φ=Φe+LJ is the total flux threading the SQUID loop given by the external flux Φe and
the self flux produced by the screening current circulating into the SQUID loop with an inductance
L. The circulating current can be expressed as J=(I1-I2)/2.
First, we consider the case of zero voltage state. Appling the Kirchhoff laws at the circuit of Fig.2,
combining the equation 1 and 3 and supposing that the junctions are identical:

 Φ 

I c (Φ ) = I 1 + I 2 = I 0 (sin ϕ 1 + sin ϕ 2 ) = 2 I 0 sin ϕ cos  π
Φ
0 


(4)

 Φ 
Φ − Φ ext
LJ LI 0 (sin ϕ1 − sin ϕ 2 )

=
=
= β L cos ϕ sin  π
Φ0
Φ0
Φ0
 Φ0 

(5)

Where ϕ=(ϕ1+ϕ2)/2 while βL=2LI0/Φ0 is the inductance parameter. It is one of the most important
parameter, since the SQUID characteristic strongly depends on the βL value.
9

If the SQUID inductance is very small, βL≈0, consequently Φ≈Φe, the SQUID critical current has a
simple co-sinusoidal behaviour and the modulation depth, defined as ∆Ic=Ic(Φe=0)-Ic(Φe=Φ0/2), is
equal to 2I0, that is the SQUID critical current modulates to zero. If the junction critical currents are
not equal, the SQUID does not modulate to zero also in the case of βL =0. In this case the Ic(Φ) is
given by:

I c (Φ ) =

(I 1 − I 2 )2 + 4 I 1 I 2 cos 2  π Φ 



(6)

 Φ0 

If βL is not zero, ∆Ic decreases by increasing the βL value as shown in the Fig. 3a where Ic, as a
function of the external magnetic flux, is reported for three different βL values. The curves have
been obtained by numerically solving the equations 4 and 5. An estimation of the critical current
modulation depth is given by: ∆IC/IC=1/(1+β) [37]. For βL = 1 the critical current modulates by
50%, and for βL >> 1, ∆IC /IC decreases as 1/βL.
As the critical current IC is a regular function of the magnetic flux through the SQUID loop, one can
easily calculate the flux change in the SQUID loop by measuring the critical current variations ∆Ic
and dividing it by the magnetic flux to critical current transfer factor (IΦ=∂ΙC/∂Φe). In this case, the
device is employed as a magnetic flux to current transducer. The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and the
magnetic flux resolution are:

SNR =

∆I c
I c .n

=

∆Φ ⋅ I Φ
I c .n

ΦN =

I c .n
IΦ

(7)

Where Ic,n is the measurement error of the critical current and ∆Ic=∆Φ ⋅ IΦ is the current
corresponding to a magnetic flux variation ∆Φ. An increase of IΦ leads to an increase of both SNR
and ΦN. As the section 3 will show, this configuration can be successfully employed in the case of
device showing an hysteretic current-voltage characteristic.

10

Fig.3. a) Critical current of a SQUID as function of the external magnetic flux threading the loop
for three different βL values. b)Voltage across a SQUID as a function of the normalized time.
The voltage state involves the presence of an oscillating current and voltage as predicted by the
second Josephson equation (2). In this case, the equations describing the SQUID dynamic are
obtained by including in the Kirchhoff law the current terms due to the voltage across the resistance
(V/R) and the capacitance (CdV/dt). Considering the equation 2 and applying the Kirchhoff law to
both SQUID arms, we obtain the following two equations:

Ic
Φ 0 d ϕ 1 Φ 0 C d 2ϕ 1
+ J = I 0 sin ϕ 1 +
+
+ I N ,1
2
2πR dt
2π dt 2
Ic
Φ 0 d ϕ 2 Φ 0 C d 2ϕ 2
− J = I 0 sin ϕ 2 +
+
+ I N ,2
2
2πR dt
2π dt 2

(8)

The above Langevin equations, together with the equation 5, provide a complete description of the
SQUID characteristics. The voltage is given by: V=1/2[d(ϕ1(t) +ϕ2(t))/dt]. The terms IN,1 and IN,2
are the Nyquist noise associated to the shunt resistors R. In the simplest case, where IN,1=IN,2=0 and

βL, βC<<1, the equation 8 and 5 can be easily solved, providing the following equation for the
SQUID I-V characteristic:
R
V (Φ e , I ) =
2


 Φ 
I −  2 I 0 cos π e  
 Φ0 


2

2

(9)

The voltage swing or peak-to-peak modulation defined as ∆VS=V(Φ0/2)-V(Φ0) is given by:
11

R I R
∆VS ( I ) = 
−
2
 2

2 
I 2 − (2 I 0 ) 


(10)

The maximum value is obtained for I=2I0, that is ∆VS=I0R.
In the more general case, the equations 8 and 5 are typically numerically solved [38-40], providing
the ϕ1(t) and ϕ2(t), which allow to compute all the SQUID characteristics. Neglecting the
capacitance and following the normalizations: current i to I0, voltage v to I0·R, applied magnetic flux

ϕe to Φ0, and time τ to Φ0/(2πI0R), and considering the inductance parameter βL=2LI0/Φ0, we
obtain the following equation:
dϕ
i
+ j = sin (ϕ1 ) + 1 + in1
2
dτ
dϕ
i
− j = sin (ϕ 2 ) + 2 + i n 2
2
dτ
j=

(11)

(ϕ1 − ϕ 2 ) − 2πφ e

v(τ ) =

πβ
1  d (ϕ1 + ϕ 2 ) 

2 
dτ


Below, we report some simulations neglecting the junction capacitance and the resistor Nyquist
noise. In particular, we numerically solved the differential equations (11) by using the Euler method
based on the difference equations. We used a time step ∆τ=0.01 over a total time T=10000,
corresponding to 106 time units. Such values guarantee a well-defined time averaged voltage. The
voltage oscillates as function of the time as shown in the Fig. 3b reporting a V(τ) for βL =1, Φe=0
and IB/I0=2.1, 6 and 12. Increasing the bias current, the voltage frequency increases and the
amplitude decreases. Supposing an oscillation period of about Φ0/(2πI0R) as in the case of IB/I0=12
reported in Fig. 3b and considering typical parameters of a dc SQUID (I0=10 µA, R=3 Ω) a
frequency of about 100 GHz is obtained. In practice, a voltage average is typically measured.
Varying the bias current and taking the average voltage <V>, the I-V characteristic can be obtained,
for a fixed Φe and βL values. The voltage-flux characteristic (V-Φ) can be obtained by varying the
12

external magnetic flux and fixing the βL and IB value. Fig. 4 reports the I-V characteristics computed
for Φe=0 and Φe=Φ0/2 and V-Φ characteristics for several values of IB/I0 ratio and βL=1, βc=0 for
all curves. As expected, the I-V does not show hysteresis while the V-Φ have a periodic behaviour
with a period equal to Φ0. The V-Φ amplitude (V(0)-V(Φ0/2)) depends on the bias current and βL
value and reaches its maximum for IB=2I0.

Fig.4 a) Current-voltage characteristics computed for Φe=0 and Φ0/2. b) Voltage-magnetic flux
characteristics computed for IB/I0=1.5, 2.0, 2.5 and 3.0. In both figures the βL = 1and βc=0.
Hence, a non-hysteretic SQUID can be considered as a magnetic flux–voltage transducer and can be
employed as a magnetic flux detector. In this case, ∆Φe=∆V/VΦ where VΦ=∂V/∂Φe is the voltage
responsivity, namely the slope of the V-Φ curve in the magnetic bias point. Typically, in this
configuration, the SQUID is biased with a constant current close to Ic and an external magnetic flux

Φe=Φ0/4 in order to maximize the VΦ and increase the SNR.
If the magnetic signals to measure are much smaller than the flux quantum, the SQUID can be work
in small signal mode. In fact, as for every continuous signal, in a suitable small range around a
point, the response of the SQUID can be considered linear with the external magnetic flux.
If the signals to detect are greater than the flux quantum, the SQUID response has to be linearized.
In order to do it, a Flux-Locked-Loop (FLL) configuration is often used [41]. In such scheme, the
output voltage is converted into a current by a resistor and fed back into the SQUID as a magnetic
13

flux, via a coil coupled with the sensor, nulling the input magnetic flux (Fig. 5). Therefore, the
SQUID works as a null detector of magnetic flux. The output voltage can be read across the
feedback resistor being proportional to the magnetic flux input. The FLL linearizes the SQUID
output, increasing the linear dynamic range.

Fig.5 Flux locked loop circuit employed to increase the linear dynamic range of a dc SQUID.
Due to the very low output voltage noise of a SQUID, direct voltage readout mode, generally, leads
to a reduction of intrinsic SQUID sensitivity. In order to solve this problem, complicated schemes
such as ac-flux modulation in combination with an impedance matching were often used [42-43]. In
recent years, a second generation of SQUID sensors with a large flux-to-voltage transfer factor and
an alternative readout circuit have been developed in order to allow a direct-coupled readout
scheme without flux modulation [44]. In comparison with the standard electronics, the directcoupled readout schemes are simpler, more compact and less expensive. In particular, circuits based
on Additional Positive Feedback (APF) are very effective [45]. The APF scheme consist of a RL
circuit in parallel to the SQUID which the effect is to render the V-Ф characteristic asymmetric, so,
if the SQUID is biased on the steeper side, an effective increase of the SQUID responsivity
(VΦ=∂V/∂Φ) is achieved.
1.4 Magnetic noise and energy sensitivity
One of the most important factor of merit of a SQUID device is the magnetic flux noise or more
precisely the spectral density of magnetic flux noise. The importance of the noise in Josephson

14

devices has stimulated many theoretical and experimental investigations leading to an exhaustive
comprehension of the main mechanisms responsible of the different noise. Theories for voltage,
current and magnetic flux noise in resistively shunted junctions [46], rf-SQUID and dc-SQUID
have been developed [1, 38-40] as well as quantum charge noise in cooper pair box [47].
In the case of a shunted dc-SQUID, this noise is essentially due to the Nyquist noise associated to
the shunt resistor with a current spectral density SI=4kBT/R where kB is the Boltzman constant. In
order to preserve the Josepshon coupling, the following condition is required: I0Φ0/2π>>kBT. It
means that the Josephson energy (I0Φ0/2π) must be much greater than the thermal energy. In other
words there is a thermal current Ith=(2πkBT)/ Φ0 so that I0>Ith in order to ensure that the thermal
fluctuations do not destroy the Josephson coupling. The value of Ith for 4.2 K (liquid helium) and 77
K (liquid nitrogen) are respectively 0.18 µA and 3.2 µA [1]. Such conditions are typically written as

Γ=2πKBT/I0Φ0<<1. The Γ parameter plays a fundamental role for both SQUID design and its
performances. In dimensionless units the spectral density of the Nyquist current noise relative to the
shunt resistance can be written as SI=4Γ. Another mandatory condition is that the magnetic energy
associated to the SQUID inductance must be much greater than the thermal energy:

Φ02/2L>>2πkBT. Also in this case it is possible to define an inductance (fluctuation threshold
inductance) LF=Φ20/(4π2kBT) so that L<LF. At T=4.2 K and 77 K the values of LF are 1.9nH and
102 pH respectively [1].
What are the effects of resistor Nyquist noise and how we can simulate its effect on SQUID
characteristics? The current noise in the shunt resistors induces a voltage noise VN(f) across the
SQUIDs, moreover it rounds the I-V characteristic and reduces the critical current. Consequently,
the I-Φ, V-Φ characteristics and the corresponding responsivities (IΦ and VΦ) are degraded too. In
order to simulate the SQUID characteristics in presence of noise, we need to insert the term IN,1 and
IN,2 in the equations 5. It can be shown that the thermal noise current has no time correlation. It
means that the correlation function is a delta function:

15

I (t ) I (t + t i =

2KB T
δ (t i )
R

(12)

So the current noise results in a frequency independent noise (white noise) with a zero average
<I(t)> =0 and a Gaussian distribution of the amplitudes. Hence, in the equation 5, IN,1 and IN,2 are
Gaussian distributions depending on the noise parameter Γ. In the following simulations, the
discrete noise source in is a sequence of random numbers, so it is a Gaussian random variable with
mean square deviation < ∆i2n>=2Γ/∆τ and average < in>=0.
Regarding the calculation procedure, it is the same of that describe above: the two phase allow to
calculate V(t), after that a fast Fourier transformer of V(t) provide the power spectral density (PSD)
SV(f) (the normalized unit of SV is I0RΦ0/2π). The PSD of the flux noise will be given by:
SΦ=SV/VΦ2, where the voltage to flux transfer factor VΦ is obtained by taking the derivative of V-Φ
characteristic at Φ=Φ0/4 (maximum responsivity). However, the values of practical interest are the
spectral densities given by the root square of the PSD: SV 1/2 (V/Hz1/2) and SΦ1/2 (Φ0/Hz 1/2). Fig. 6a
reports the spectra of the voltage noise relative to two different Γ values (0.01 and 0.05). They have
been computed for an external flux bias of Φa=Φ0/4 and a bias current of IB=2.1I0.

Fig. 6 a) Power spectral densities of the voltage noise for two different Γ values. The inset shows
the voltage as a function of the time for the same Γ values. The flux and current bias are Φe=Φ0/4
and IB=2.1I0 respectively. b) Voltage responsivity as a function of the bias current. The maximum
value is obtained for a bias lower than the SQUID critical current (2I0).
16

It is evident the presence of the peaks related to the fundamental Josephson frequency fJ=<V>/Φ0
(in normalized unit fJ=<v>/2π).
The SV values are typically taken in the white region of the spectrum that is at a frequency smaller
than the peak relative to the fundamental Josephson frequency. The inset of the Fig. 6a shows the
v(τ) relative to Γ=0.01 (blue color) and Γ=0.05 (red color). As expected the peak frequency in the
spectrum corresponds to the inverse of the period of the v(τ). The PSD of v(τ) have been obtained
via Welch’s method by using a sampling frequency ωs=1/∆τ. The spectra have been obtained by
averaging 60 spectra of time traces (v(τ)). In the figure 6b, the voltage responsivity VΦ as a function
of the bias current IB is reported.
The power spectral density of the voltage SV and the spectral density of magnetic flux SΦ1/2 as a
function of the bias current IB are reported in the Fig. 7 for βL=1, Φ=0.25 Φ0 and Γ=0.05. From the
figure, we observe that the minimum of SΦ1/2 corresponds to about 1.6 Ic where the values of the VΦ
and SV are:
VΦ ≅

2 Io R R
=
Φ0
L

S Φ1 / 2 ≅ 4

SV ≅

0.8 I 0 RΦ 0
= 16 K B T R
2π

(13)

KB T
L
R

In order to compare SQUID with different inductance, SQUID noise is often presented as the noise
energy for unit bandwidth:

ε≅

SΦ 8 K B T L
≅
2L
R

(14)

It is expressed in unit of h . A SQUID can reach an energy resolution as low as few h [48,49], in
other words it is limited by quantum mechanics uncertainty principle.
It has been proved that the condition βL=1 and Φ=0.25 Φ0, optimize the SQUID performances [38].
Hence in order to reduce the flux noise of a SQUID, we have to reduce the inductance of the loop,
increase the shunt resistance value preserving the conditions βC<<1, Γ<<1, βL =1.

17

Fig.7 a) Power spectral density value in the white region of the voltage noise as a function of the
bias current. For bias current much greater than the SQUID critical current, the voltage noise
tends to the Nyquist noise of the normal resistance (Rs/2). b) Spectral density of the magnetic flux
noise as a function of the bias current. It has been obtained by taking the root square of the the
ratio SV/VΦ2.
In the practical case, the βC value is not zero, because the Josephson junction have a non negligible
capacitance, however simulations taking into account also the second derivative in the equations 8,
show that the results for bias current less than the critical currents of SQUID are not far from those
for very small βC values.
It is worth to note that for overdamped SQUID (βC <<1) operating at large thermal fluctuations, an
analytical theory has been developed [50]. It is based on the equivalency between the coupled
Langevin equations and the single two-dimensional Fokker-Plank equations.
The total voltage or magnetic flux noise is given by Vn = [<V(t)2>-<V(t)>2] 1/2=σv, Φn=[<Φ(t)2><Φ(t)>2] 1/2=σΦ, where σ is the full width at half height (FWHM) of the voltage or flux distribution
(in the Gaussian case σ=FWHM/2.35). Vn and Φn are respectively related to the PSD of the voltage
SV (f) and of the magnetic flux SΦ(f) by :

18

fs 2

Vn = σ V =

∫

fs 2

S v ( f ) df ;

Φn = σΦ =

0

∫

SΦ ( f ) df

(15)

0

The integration span ranges from zero to half of the sampling frequency (Shannon-Nyquist
theorem).
In presence of hysteresis, the SQUID can operates as magnetic flux to current transducer (see
section1.2) and the current noise is given by In=[<I(t)2>-<I(t)>2] 1/2=σI which is the width at half
maximum of the critical current distribution P(I). In analogy to the equation 15, In is related to the
PSD of the critical current fluctuation S∆Ic (f) by :
fB / 2

In = σ I =

∫

S ∆I c ( f ) df

(16)

0

Where fΒ is the physical bandwidth of the system. A reasonable assumption is that the physical
bandwidth is equal to the plasma frequency of the junction ωp= 2πfp=(2πIc/CΦ0)1/2. If the noise is
white, from the equation 16, the PSD white level of the critical current noise is given by 2πσI2/ωp.
So, the spectral density of magnetic flux noise of a hysteretic device can be written as [51]:
S Φ1 / 2 =

σI
IΦ

2π

(17)

ωp

In practice, the bandwidth is limited by the readout electronic or the speed of the measurements,
therefore the (17) can be written as:
S Φ1 / 2 =

σI

(18)

 ∆t dI 

I Φ 
I
dt
 c


Where ∆t is the measurement time interval and dI/dt is the current sweep rate.
Before to close this short compendium about the basic principle and the noise of a dc SQUID, it is
mandatory to mention the low frequency noise (1/f or flicker noise [52]) in a SQUID device. The
theoretical and experimental investigation of such a noise is very important for many applications
19

such as biomagnetism, geophysics and quantum computing. In particular, concerning the latter
topic, it seems that the low frequency noise is related to the decoherence time in Josephson qubits
[53,54]. This has stimulated many theoretical [55-57] and experimental [58-62] investigations of
low frequency noise in Josephson device.
As reported in a pioneering work of Koch et al [63], there are two main sources of low frequency
noise in a dc SQUID: the fluctuations of the critical current of the Josephson junctions (critical
current noise) and the motion of the magnetic vortex trapped in the SQUID body (flux noise). Being
a SQUID biased with a constant current, a critical current fluctuation produces voltage fluctuations
and so a magnetic flux noise. The critical current fluctuations may occur in the process of tunnelling
of electrons through the barrier that can be trapped in a defect and subsequently released.
Occupation of the trap induces a local change in the height of the tunnel barrier and hence in the
critical current density of that region. Hence, a single trap leads to a randomly switching critical
current I0 of the junction between two values. It can be shown that this process leads to a 1/f
spectrum [41,64]. Fortunately, this noise can be reduced by using suitable readout based on
reversing the bias current at some frequency above the corner of 1/f noise [41,44].
The second main source of 1/f noise in SQUIDs is a flux noise and cannot be reduced by any bias
reversal scheme. Due to the presence of defects in the body of SQUID or in any superconductive
circuital elements connected to it, during the cooling process a magnetic vortex can be trapped in a
defect acting as a pinning state. If the thermal energy is sufficiently large, the vortex may overcome
the pinning energy and hop back and forth between two or more adjacent pinning sites inducing a
change in the flux coupled to the SQUID. In order to reduce this noise, it is needed to decrease the
number of defects by employing very high quality superconducting film or to design the
superconducting component so that the vortices do not enter, by using for example narrow
linewidth structures. In particular, the linewidth should be reduced below to (Φ0/B)1/2 [65] where B
is the magnetic field in which the device is cooled. Another way to reduce this kind of noise is to
prevent the motion of the vortex by improving its pinning inside superconducting structures. To this
20

aim, suitable structures inserted in the SQUID ring such as moats and slits can be used [66-67].
They act as a reliable traps preventing the motion of the vortices and reducing the flicker noise. In
the case of SQUID device moving in an ambient magnetic field, it has been shown the effectiveness
of the flux Dam that is a weak link in the superconducting structure, in reducing the 1/f noise [68].
In fact, the flux Dam limits the circulating supercurrents, which induce the generation of the
vortices.
However, it is worth to stress that the origin of 1/f flux noise in LTc dc-SQUID is a controversial
issue and, recently, several models have been proposed to explain it in Josephson devices. In 2007,
Koch et al [58] assumed that the low frequency flux noise was generated by the magnetic moments
of electrons in defect states, which they occupy for a wide distribution of time before escaping. Two
years later, Sendelback et al [61] showed that, due to spin-spin interactions on the surface, the
SQUID inductance, fluctuated with a 1/f power spectrum generating inductance noise highly related
to conventional 1/f flux noise. In 2013, an experimental study of 1/f noise in SQUIDs with
systematically varied geometry evidenced that their results were incompatible with a model based
on the random reversal of independent surface spins [69]. Very recently, a theory of spin diffusion
was proposed to explain the low frequency flux noise in the SQUIDs [70].
1.5 Detection of physical quantities
A SQUID is essentially a magnetic flux detector. However, it can detect with a ultra-high
sensitivity any physical quantities that can be converted in a magnetic flux trading the SQUID loop.
Depending on the quantity to measure, it is needed to employ a suitable SQUID sensor design. In
this section, we report the basic principle of the main SQUID configurations.
1.5.1 Magnetic field measurements
In the case of a bare SQUID, the rms magnetic field noise SB1/2(f) is simply given by SΦ1/2/Aℓ where
Aℓ is the geometrical area of the superconducting loop. Since the flux noise increases with the ring
inductance (equation 13), it is not possible increase the magnetic field sensitivity by increasing the

21

geometrical area of the SQUID ring. Moreover, an increase of the loop inductance leads also to a
decrease of voltage responsivity.

Fig. 8 Schemes of the main SQUID configurations: a) and b) magnetometer and gradiometer
configuration, c) voltage or current sensor, d) SQUID for magnetic field detection with a high
spatial resolution.
Therefore, in order to increase the magnetic field sensitivity, a superconducting flux transformer is
employed. It consists of a superconducting primary coil working as a magnetic flux pick-up (pickup coil) connected in series with a superconducting secondary coil magnetically coupled to the
SQUID (input coil) (Fig.8a). When a magnetic flux Φp is applied, due to Meissner effect, a
screening current flows into pick-up coil to nullify the total magnetic flux. Such screening current
flows also in the input coil inducing a magnetic flux ΦS into the SQUID loop [27,41]:

22

ΦS =

k LL i
Mi
Φp = i
Φp
Li + L P
Li + L p

(19)

Where Li e Lp are the inductances of the input coil and the pickup coil respectively, ki is a coupling
factor, and Mi is the mutual inductance between the SQUID loop and input coil.
By inverting the (19) and considering that Bp=Φp/Ap (Ap is the pick-up coil area), it is possible to
obtain the spectral density of the magnetic field noise SB1/2(f) of the SQUID magnetometer [27,
41,71]:

S

1/ 2
B

=

S Φ1 /,2p
Ap

=

L p + Li
M i Ap

S Φ1 / 2 = BΦ S Φ1 / 2 ;

BΦ =

L p + Li
M i Ap

(20)

BΦ is the magnetic flux to magnetic field conversion efficiency or SQUID sensitivity. It is a
fundamental parameter for a SQUID magnetometer and assumes the minimum value when Lp = Li.
It is worth to note that, by using the superconductive flux transformer, an increase of field
sensitivity of two orders of magnitude can be easily obtained with respect to the bare SQUID.
Typically, a SQUID magnetometer with a square pick-up coil of about 1 cm2 exhibits a magnetic
flux noise as low as 1fT/Hz1/2. An alternative to the superconducting flux transformer is the
multiloop or cartwheel SQUID. In this configurations, the SQUID loop consists of several large
loops forming a cartwheel [45,72]. The loops are connected in parallel across the same junctions in
order to reduce the total inductance of the SQUID and the effective area is that of a single loop.
Usually, a multiloop magnetometer exhibits a magnetic field sensitivity BΦ lower than a flux
transformer based magnetometer with the same size. Using such a design and sub-micrometer cross
type Josephson tunnel junctions, a SQUID magnetometer exhibiting a magnetic field noise as low
as 0.3 fT/Hz1/2 has been developed few years ago [73].
It worth noting that promising superconductive magnetometers not based on the quantum
interference have been also developed in the last years. They include magnetometers based on fluxflow in long Josephson junctions [74-76] and kinetic inductance magnetometers [77].
23

1.5.2 Magnetic gradient measurements
The magnetometer configuration is able to detect both uniform and non-uniform magnetic fields. To
reject the uniform magnetic field, the two pick up loops are wound in opposite directions and
balanced. So, a change in a uniform magnetic field does not induces supercurrent in the input coil
and subsequently there is no magnetic flux treading the SQUID, whereas a magnetic filed gradient
generates a supercurrent (proportional to the gradient) that is detected by the SQUID (Fig. 8b).
Being sensitive to the magnetic field gradient, these devices are called first derivative gradiometer.
To measure fields gradient in z direction (∂Bz/∂z), the axial configuration is used while the planar
configuration detects those in x-y directions (∂Bx/∂y or ∂By/∂x).
Considering the axial configuration (Fig. 8b), the magnetic flux coupled into the SQUID via mutual
inductance Mi is [78]:

2d 3 M i  ∂Bz 
Φs = Mi Js =


2 L p + Li  ∂z 

(21)

Where d is the distance between the pickup coil centres (baseline); thus the spectral density of the
noise gradient is expressed by:

2 L p + Li S Φ1 / 2
∂Bz
S Φ1 / 2
=
= BΦ
;
∂z n
Mi
2d 3
2d 3

BΦ =

2 L p + Li
Mi

(22)

Balances of 1 part in 100 to 1 part in 1000 are typically obtained in axial gradiometers. Analogue
expression can be found for SQUID gradiometers in planar configuration that offers the advantage
of both a very high intrinsic balance, limited by the precision of the photolithographic techniques (1
part in 10000), and a good matching between the input inductance of the SQUID and the detection
superconducting circuit inductance ensuring an optimal signal transfer. Moreover, a planar SQUID
gradiometer avoids the unreliable superconducting soldering, guarantying a better reliability during
the thermal cycles.

24

It is also possible to realize second derivative gradiometers by arranging the detections coils in a
suitable way. If well balanced, they are insensitive to the uniform magnetic fields and its first spatial
derivative. The SQUID gradiometers in both configurations are widely employed in multichannel
systems for biomagnetism where a high (ambient field) rejection factor is required.
1.5.3 Current and voltage measurements
A simple way to measure an electrical current by a SQUID is to send it in a coil coupled to the
SQUID loop [1, 41] (Fig. 8c). In this case, the magnetic flux coupled to the SQUID loop is Φ=M i
and the spectral density of the current noise will be:

S 1I / 2 =

S Φ1 / 2
= I Φ S Φ1 / 2 ;
M

IΦ =

1
M

(23)

Where M is the mutual inductance between the input coil and the SQUID loop. A suitable way to
obtain a practical and reliable SQUID amperometer is to use a flux transformer that converts easily
the electrical current into a magnetic flux treading the SQUID loop and allows to obtain fully
integrated sensors. An efficient way to couple the signal coil to the SQUID is also obtained by using
a double transformer coupling [79-81] by inserting a matching (intermediary) transformer between
the signal coil and the input terminals of the classic configuration. With respect to the single
transformer, it allows to efficiently match the low-inductance SQUID with a very high signal coil
inductance (tens of µH), obtaining an ultra low electric current noise. In the last years,
superconducting current sensors based on the SQUID including an integrated signal coil (single
transformer), two stage sensor including double-transformer coupling exhibiting a spectral current
noise of few tens of fA/Hz1/2 at T=4.2 K, have been developed [82-83].
A SQUID voltmeter can be simply obtained by connecting the signal source in series with the input
coil of the SQUID, via a resistance. In this configuration, the feedback current is sent into a known
resistance to obtain a null balancing measurement of voltage. The noise is essentially limited by the
Nyquist noise of the resistance which can vary from 10-6 to 100 Ω giving a spectral density of the
voltage noise ranging from 10-14 to 10-10 V/Hz1/2.
25

1.5.4 Superconducting flux transformer design
As seen, the magnetometer, gradiometer and amplifier designs can be optimized by minimizing the
value of BΦ or IΦ in equations 20-23. If the flux-transformer is integrated, an excellent coupling to
the SQUID is obtained using a Ketchen-type design [84,85]. The SQUID loop, in a square washer
configuration, is coupled to a multi-turn thin film input coil, which is connected to a square singleturn pick-up loop (Fig.9). In such a way, the coupling between the washer and the input coil is very
effective and the input coil inductance is proportional to the turn numbers and hole inductance. In
this configuration, the SQUID inductance does not depend on the outer dimension of the washer but
only on the hole dimension. Hence, the input coil inductance can be adjusted to match a suitable
load by varying the outer dimension of the washer to accommodate the required number of input
coil turns. The Josephson junctions are located on the outer edge of the square loop, away from the
higher field region at the centre square hole. Consequently, a slit through the conductor loop is
used, introducing a parasitic inductance. Such additional inductance is only partially coupled to the
coil turns, reducing the overall coupling efficiency. So, it is preferable to avoid very long slit.

Fig. 9 Ketchen-Jaycox flux transformer scheme: a multi turn input coil is magnetically coupled to a
SQUID ring in a washer configuration.
Moreover, the washer structure tends to focus magnetic flux into the central hole by an amount
proportional to the product of outer dimension l and the hole dimension d increasing the flux
capture area by a factor (Aw/Ah)1/2 (Aw and Ah are the geometrical areas of the washer and hole
26

respectively) [86]. The flux focusing effect is largely employed to fabricate SQUID sensors for
many applications.
1.5.5 High spatial resolution measurements
In order to increase the magnetic field sensitivity, it is needed to increase the detection coil or the
SQUID loop dimensions. However, in this way the spatial resolution decreases and so, the
capability of the SQUID to distinguish two or more magnetic sources close together. Hence, if a
high spatial resolution is required, as in the magnetic microscopy, the pick-up coil should be as
small as possible [87-89]. If the area of the detection coil is comparable or lower than the SQUID
loop area, the flux transformer is not effective and the SQUID loop itself can be employed as
detection coil. However, it is preferable to keep the Josephson junctions away from the magnetic
source under investigation. Typically, a circular pick-up loop is a part of the SQUID self-inductance
and it is connected by a stripline to Josephson junctions (Fig. 8c). The stripline consists of two
superconducting layers separated by a double insulation layer and it is insensitive to normal fields,
avoiding additional parasitic detection area [90]. Between the end of the stripline structure and the
Josephson junctions a washer structure can be inserted in order to modulate the sensor and to
operate in flux locked loop (FLL) mode. In such a way, direct coupling of the modulation magnetic
flux to the measurement volume is avoided. SQUID having a pick coil area of the order of few µm2
are called microSQUIDs and are mainly employed in superconducting scanning microscopes. As
expected, microSQUIDs exhibit a poor magnetic field sensitivity. In fact for a micropick-up coil
area ranging from 4 to 25 µm2 we have a BΦ=1/Ap=80-500 µT/Φ0 and so a high value of magnetic
field noise spectral density SB1/2 80-500 pT/Hz1/2 (here a magnetic flux noise of 1µΦ0/Hz1/2 has
been assumed).
1.6 Main SQUID applications
Due to their ultra-high sensitivity, SQUIDs are widely employed in many applications. Here, we
briefly mention the main SQUID applications. An exhaustive review of most of the SQUID

27

applications, expect those related to nanoSQUIDs, can be found in the references [2-4]. In the Fig.
10, we report the typical magnetic field sensitivity and the bandwidth of the different applications.
The sensitivities of the LTs and HTs SQUID sensors are also indicated.
Biomagnetism, namely the study of magnetic field associated to the electric activity in the human
body, is one of the most important applications of SQUIDs and in particular of SQUID
magnetometers and gradiometers. Since from the first SQUID measurements of biomagnetic signal
arising from the heart and the brain in the early 70’, many efforts have been devoted to the
development of biomagnetic instrumentations. Nowadays, suitable multichannel systems, up to
some hundreds channels [91-94], are available for the study of the magnetic activity of the brain
(magnetoencephalography, MEG) and the heart (magnetocardiography, MCG). MEG is a noninvasive, functional imaging technique that measures magnetic fields generated by the neuronal
activity of the brain using ultra high sensitivity SQUID sensors. Among the available brain
functional imaging methods, MEG uniquely features both a good spatial and an excellent temporal
resolution, allowing the investigation of many key questions in neuroscience and neurophysiology.
MEG measurements reflect intracellular electric current flowing in the brain and provide direct
information about the dynamics of evoked and spontaneous neural activity. In addition, MEG
measurements are not subject to interferences due to the tissues and fluids lying between the cortex
and the scalp, and magnetic fields are not distorted by the different conduction of the skull, unlike
with electroencephalograms (EEGs). These features make MEG an excellent tool to localize the
subcortical sources of brain activity and to investigate dynamic neuronal processes, as well as to
study cognitive processes, such as language perception, memory encoding and retrieval and higherlevel tasks. As regard as the clinical applications, it has been proven that MEG is a useful diagnostic
tool in the identification, prevention and treatment of numerous diseases and illnesses.
The MCG is a non-invasive electrophysiological mapping technique that provides unprecedented
insight into the generation, localization, and dynamic behaviour of electric current in the heart. The
aim of the MCG measurement is to determine the spatio-temporal magnetic field distribution
28

produced by the cardiac electric activity in a measurement plane just above the thorax. MCG
signals, unlike ECG, are not attenuated by surrounding anatomical structures, tissues, and body
fluids, thereby providing more accurate information. Moreover, compared with surface potential
recordings, multichannel MCG mapping is a faster and contactless method for 3D imaging and
localization of cardiac electrophysiologic phenomena with higher spatial and temporal resolution.

Fig.10 Magnetic field sensitivity and the bandwidth of the main SQUID applications. The lines
indicate the sensitivities of four different magnetic sensors (LTs and HTs SQUIDs, BF-4 and BF-6
coil). Note that only the LTs SQUID is enough sensitive to cover all application fields.
As documented by numerous papers, MCG can also be useful to improve diagnostic accuracy.
Recently, the development of standardized instrumentations for unshielded MCG, its ease of use
and reliability even in emergency rooms has triggered a new interest from clinicians for
magnetocardiography, leading to several new installations of unshielded systems worldwide. In
addition to brain and heart, the non-invasive measurement techniques based on SQUIDs have been
applied also to other human organs such as stomach and intestines (magnetoenterography), lung
(magnetopneumography)

[95],

muscles

(magnetomyography)

and

peripheral

nerves

(magnetoneurography) [96]. Other useful biomedical applications include liver iron concentration
detection which allows a completely non invasive measurement of iron overload in patient affect by

29

thalessemia or hemochromatosis [97,98]. SQUID Magnetic immunoassay employs functionalised
molecules bound to an antibody or antigen. By measuring the remnant magnetic field or the
magnetic relaxation is possible to determine the bound or unbounded molecules [99].
An interesting field of application of SQUID sensors is nondestructive evaluation (NDE) [2-4,
100,101]. NDE is the non-invasive identification of structural or material flaws in a specimen.
Examples are the imaging of surface and subsurface cracks or pits due to corrosion or fatigue in
aging aircraft and reinforcing rods in concrete structures. There are several competing methods for
NDE such as acoustic, thermal, and electromagnetic techniques. The advantages of the SQUID for
NDE include high sensitivity (about 10–100 fT·Hz−1/2), wide bandwidth (from dc to 10 kHz), broad
dynamic range (>80 dB). Moreover, the ability of SQUIDs to operate down to zero frequency
allows them to sense much deeper flaws than traditional techniques, to detect and monitor the flow
of steady state corrosion currents, and to image the static magnetization of paramagnetic materials.
An important application of SQUIDs in NDE is the detection of subsurface damage in metallic
structures such as aircraft parts by eddy current techniques. Here, an alternating magnetic field
produced by a drive coil is applied and the fields generated by the induced eddy currents in the
structure are lock-in detected. The structural flaws diverts the eddy currents distorting the magnetic
field. Since the eddy currents flow over a skin depth, which is inversely proportional to the square
root of the frequency, deep defects require correspondingly low frequencies. Here, the flat
frequency response of SQUIDs is a distinct advantage over the response of currently used coil
systems, which fall off with decreasing frequency.
Scanning SQUID microscopy (SSM) is a technique capable of imaging the magnetic field
distribution in close proximity across the surface of a sample under investigation with high
sensitivity and modest spatial resolution [2-4, 88, 102]. Most often, the sample is moved over the
SQUID in a two-dimensional scanning process and the magnetic signal is plotted versus the
coordinates to produce an image. The frequency at which the image is obtained ranges from near
zero, where simply the static magnetic field produced by the sample is measured, to beyond 1 GHz.
30

Today, SQUID microscopes with cold samples have a spatial resolution of about 5µm, while those
with room temperature samples have a resolution ranging between 30 and 50µm. The advantage of
the scanning SQUID microscope is its very high sensitivity. In fact, the scanning SQUID
microscope is orders of magnitude more sensitive to magnetic fields than the other techniques. A
disadvantage of SSM is its relatively poor spatial resolution. Whereas for scanning SQUID
microscope a resolution of only 5µm has been demonstrated, scanning electron microscopy with
polarization analysis, for example, has a spatial resolution of 30-50 nm. Nevertheless, there are
many possible applications of SSM, which do not require submicron spatial resolution.
SQUID systems are also employed in determining the magnetic properties of the earth [2-4]. This
concerns both the characterization of specific earth samples (rock magnetometry) and the mapping
of the earth magnetic field as well as its electromagnetic impedance. In this framework, an
important application of SQUID is in magnetotellurics, involving the simultaneously measurements
of the fluctuating horizontal components of the electric and magnetic fields at the earth’s surface
originated in the magnetosphere and ionosphere. From these frequency-dependent fields, the
impedance tensor of the ground can be calculated estimating the spatial variation of the resistivity
of the ground. The interesting frequency range is about 10−3 to 102 Hz corresponding to a skin depth
between about 50 km and 150 m (assuming a resistivity of 10Ω·m). The sensitivity required for
magnetotellurics is about 20-30 fT/√Hz in the white noise regime and a 1/f knee of 1 Hz. Currently,
magnetic measurements in geophysics are mostly made with induction coils. Below about 1 Hz, the
spectral density of the noise in coils increases as 1/f3, whereas that of SQUIDs increases only as 1/f,
giving the latter magnetometer a substantial advantage at low frequencies. Furthermore, coils for
use below 1 Hz can be as long as 1.5 m, and the deployment of three such coils orthogonally, buried
in the ground for stability, is a tedious undertaking. So, a three-axis SQUID magnetometer in a
compact Dewar with a long hold time becomes competitive.
SQUIDs play a key role in Metrology and in particular in the development of quantum electrical
standards [2-4]. Significant applications includes the cryogenic current comparator that enables the
31

accurate measurement of the ratio of two direct currents. Promising and interesting results have
been also obtained in other domains: ionising radiation, X-ray and Γ-ray spectrometry,
thermometry, etc [2-4].
Moreover, as mentioned in the introduction SQUID devices have been successfully employed in
several experiments of basic Physic including cosmology, astrophysics, general relativity, particle
physics, quantum optic, and quantum computing.
2. NanoSQUIDs: fundamentals, theoretical elements and spin sensitivity
In the previous section, we have seen that a SQUID is able to detect, with an ultra high sensitivity, a
magnetic flux or any physical quantity that can be converted in a magnetic flux threading the
SQUID loop. The device design strongly depends on the measurement to be performed. What can
we say about the capability of SQUIDs to detect the magnetic moment associated to a nano-object?
How to design and fabricate an appropriate SQUID sensor? How we can evaluate the magnetic
moment sensitivity of a SQUID?
In this section, we will provide an answer to all previous questions. We will start with an
introduction to nanoSQUIDs stressing the motivation, the principle of measurement of magnetic
nano-objects and their potentiality in view of investigations of small spin populations.
2.1 NanoSQUID: origin and motivation
As seen in the section 1, the energy sensitivity of a SQUID is proportional to the loop inductance L
(equation 13, 14). Hence, to increase the sensitivity, a small inductance has to be employed.
Following this criteria, in the 1980 Voss et al [37,103], developed a niobium dc-SQUID to reach an
energy resolution close to the limit of the uncertainty principle. By using electron beam lithography
they fabricated a SQUID having a loop area less than 1 µm2 and two micro Dayem bridges and
obtained an an energy sensitivity of 19 ħ at T=4.2 K. Few years later, Awschalom et al [49] and
Ketchen et al [104] showed that the SQUID capability to detect a magnetic moment is proportional
to the diameter of its loop and introduced a new figure of merit: the spin sensitivity, where the spins
32

are counted in unit of Bohr magnetons (µB= eħ/2me=9,274 × 10-24 J·T-1). Their devices were based
on two micro pick-up coils in a gradiometric configuration connected to an input coil magnetically
coupled to a SQUID loop. An energy sensitivity as low as 1.7 ħ was obtained at T=290 mK [49].
They proposed to employ these SQUID micro-gradiometers to investigate the magnetic properties
of micro-sized samples at low temperature. At same time, Gallop et al. [105], proposed a prototype
SQUID magnetometer based on the measurement of the free precessing nuclear magnetization of a
sample of 3He. They calculated the minimum number of nuclear spins detectable, founding the
same Ketchen’s result. In nineties of the last century, Wernsdorfer et al [106,107] successfully
employed micro-sized SQUIDs in several experiments to investigate the magnetization of
nanoparticles and nanowires. The interesting experimental study performed by using such
microSQUIDs, stimulated the researcher to develop even smaller SQUID in order to study very
small clusters of magnetic nano-objects, with the aim to detect the single spin. Thanks to the
progress in nanotechnology, in the 2003 Lam and Tilbrook [108] developed the first nanoSQUID
for the detection of small spin populations, having a hole side length of 200 nm. Thereafter, several
nanoSQUIDs with an adequate sensitivity to detect the magnetic response of few spins have been
developed. As will be shown in the following, high magnetic moment sensitivity can also be
obtained by sitting the nanomagnet to be investigated on the SQUID Josephson junctions with a
very small cross section. Thus, the nanoSQUIDs can have either submicron loop or nanometric
Josephson junctions.
To investigate magnetic properties, the nano-object should be positioned within the pick-up coil or
SQUID loop. By applying an in-plane magnetic field, a magnetization of the sample is induced
resulting in a magnetic flux variation proportional to magnetization change, trough a coupling factor
that depends on SQUID and sample geometries [106, 107, 109].
2.2 Magnetic moment and spin sensitivity
In order to intuitively understanding why the capability of a SQUID to detect a small magnetic
moment increases by decreasing the loop size, consider the sketch reported in the Fig. 11. A
33

representation of the magnetic flux lines related to a magnetic moment oriented in the z direction
and SQUID having three different coil sizes are reported. In the largest coil case (a), we can see that
only few field lines contribute to the total flux threading the loop, the others return within the loop
and will give no net contribution to the magnetic flux. By decreasing the detection coil size, the
number of flux lines which return within the loop decreases and the net magnetic flux increases. In
the smallest coil (c), all field lines give a contribution to the magnetic flux. On the other side, if the
size of coil tends to infinite, there is no net magnetic flux linkage into the loop because all flux lines
return within the loop.

Fig.11 Schematic representation of magnetic flux lines of a magnetic moment located in centre of a
SQUID flux capture area for three different loop sizes.
Beyond this intuitive explanation, we will provide a formal demonstration of the above statement
for a simple case and will give the definition of the spin or magnetic moment sensitivity.
Let us consider the elementary magnetic moment (µB) or a single spin positioned over a square coil
with a side length L and oriented along the z-axis (Fig.12a). We also suppose that the SQUID coil is
composed of an idealized filamentary square loop and that the spin lies in the same plane of the
SQUID loop and it is located in its centre, in other words x ' = y ' = z ' = 0 . To obtain the magnetic
flux through the SQUID loop, we have to calculate the surface integral on the loop area of the
magnetic field produced by the magnetic moment µB. It is equivalent to calculate the line integral of
the vector potential associated to µB across the contour ring. Under the aforementioned
assumptions, the Cartesian components of the magnetic vector potential A(r) at generic position
r(x,y,z) , are:
34

Ax = −

µ0 µ B y
;
4π r 3

Ay =

µ0 µ B x
4π r 3

(24)

Here, µ0 is the magnetic vacuum permeability, and r=[x2+y2+z2] ½. The magnetic flux due to the
elementary magnetic moment is:
r r
Φ µ = ∫ A ⋅ ds

(25)

Where the integral is considered along the closed line of the SQUID loop. The contribution of the
four sides of the square loop can be calculated as [110]:

 2 2µ µ
µ µ 
L/2
L/2
0 B
=
2
dy
Φ µ = 0 B  2 dx
+
3
/
2
3
/
2
2
2
4π  − L / 2 (L / 2 ) + x 2
πL
(L / 2) + y 2 
−L / 2

L/ 2

L/ 2

∫ [

]

∫ [

]

[26]

Fig.12 Scheme of a square (a) and circular (b) SQUID detection coil including an elementary
magnetic moment (Bohr magneton or spin) located in a generic position P=(x ' , y ' , z ' ).

The same result is obtained by integrating the magnetic field of the dipole over the SQUID loop
area [111]. In the case of circular loop (Fig.12b), Φµ = µ0 µB /2a, where a is the coil radius and
imposing conditions r ' = θ ' = z ' = 0 [104,108]. A relevant figure of merit of a nano-SQUID is the
minimum detectable spin number per band unit or spectral density of the spin noise Sn1/2. It can be
obtained by taking the ratio of the spectral density of the flux noise SΦ1/2 and the net magnetic flux
due to the single spin:
S n1 / 2 =

SΦ1 / 2

Φµ

=

SΦ1 / 2π L
2 2 µ0 µ B

(square loop)

35

(27)

S n1 / 2 =

S Φ1 / 2 S Φ1 / 2 2 a
=
Φµ
µ0 µ B

(circular coil)

(28)

In both case, the spin sensitivity increases by decreasing the side length L or the diameter 2a of the
SQUID loop. As for the SQUID magnetometer, gradiometer or amperometer, even in this case we
can define a transfer factor MΦ, equal to the inverse of Φµ so that the spin sensitivity can be
expressed as: Sn1/2=MΦSΦ1/2. As will be shown in the section 2.6, the spin sensitivity strongly
depends on the position of the magnetic moment within the SQUID loop and on the distance from
the SQUID plane.

2.3 A simple way to make a nanoSQUID
As shown in the previous section, the capability of a SQUID to measure small magnetic nanoobjects depends on the detection coil size. In particular, if we consider a flux noise of 0.1-1.0

µΦ0/Hz1/2, we can estimate by the formulas (25, 26) that a sensitivity of few spin per bandwidth unit
requires a loop side length of 100 nm or a radius of 50 nm in the case of circular loop.
SQUIDs having an effective area much smaller than 1 µm2, require deep sub-micron Josephson
junctions in order to maintain the detection size as designed. However, a typical SQUID employs
two Josephson tunnel junctions that are limited by photolithographic process to about one micron.
Apart from the technological limitations, there are major difficulties in using conventional tri-layer
Josephson tunnel junctions at deep sub-micron scale, since the junctions should have a critical
current density as high as 107-108 A/cm2 in order to guarantee a suitable noise parameter of the
SQUID device (see section 1.4). This requirement adds further complications to the fabrication
process. As will be show in the next section, very recently, most of the above obstacles have been
overcome.
In any case, good alternatives to tunnel junctions are superconducting nanobridges [112] (or Dayem
nanobridges) which consist of nano-constrictions in a superconducting film with length and width
less than one micrometer (Fig. 13). The Josephson effect into the nanobridge junction were
predicted in 1964 by Anderson and Dayem [113]. In particular, they first demonstrated that
36

superconducting bridges display microwave-induced steps in their current-voltage characteristics,
similar to those observed in Josephson tunnel junctions. Nano-bridges junctions show a much
higher critical current and they can be made by the same superconducting material as the rest of the
SQUID in a single layer superconducting thin film. Thus, the fabrication of nanoSQUIDs based on
nanobridges is relatively simple being obtained by a single nanopatternig step, avoiding the
alignment of several layers on top of each other.

Fig.13 a) Schematic view of a nano-constriction Josephson junction. If the length and the width of
the bridge are comparable with the coherence length of the superconductor, a Josephson tunnelling
occurs. b) microSQUID based on Dayem bridges fabricated by electron beam lithography. Image
adapted from [37].
Contrary to the tunnel junctions, Dayem nanobridges exhibit a high current density and are resilient
to the magnetic field applied in the plane containing the SQUID loop. Moreover, the use of very
thin film (10÷20 nm) to fabricate SQUID based on nanobridges, prevent flux trapping also for
applied magnetic field up to several T. The insensitivity to high magnetic fields applied in the
SQUID plane is a necessary condition for the measurement of the nanoparticles magnetization. On
the other hand, unlike an over-damped SQUID based on tunnel Josephson junctions, the currentvoltage (I-V) characteristics of SQUIDs based on Dayem nanobridges are typically hysteretic at
T≤4.2 K. This prevents the use of the SQUID as a magnetic flux to voltage transducer, resulting in a
loss of device sensitivity. Figure 13b, shows the nanobridge based SQUID reported in the
pioneering work of Voss et al [103].

37

Note that, if the width and the thickness of a superconducting line is small (less than 1 µm), the
kinetic inductance can no longer be neglected. For a nanowire, the kinetic inductance is [114]:
LK =

µ 0 λ2 l

(29)

wt

Where λ is the London penetration depth, l and w are the length and the width of the bridge
respectively, and t is its thickness. If we consider a niobium nanobridge having a length of 100 nm,
a width of 80 nm and a thickness of 20 nm, the kinetic inductance is 1.5 pH, which could be
comparable or greater than the SQUID geometrical inductance. Therefore, we can expect that total
inductance is dominated by the contributions of the kinetic inductances of the bridges.
Despite their simple structure, we would like to point out that the superconducting nanobridges
have been proposed also in other interesting applications as photon detectors, hot electron
bolometers as detectors in astrophysical observations at terahertz frequencies and in flux qubits
[115-118].
2.4 Theoretical aspects of Dayem bridges
There are several exhaustive reviews describing the theoretical aspects of Josephon junction based
on nanobridges [112, 119-120], so below we will provide just the main peculiar aspects useful to
understanding the predictions of the main features of the SQUID based on nanobridges.
The most important issue of a Josephson structure (tunnel junction, Dayem bridge, point contact,
etc.) is the relationship between the supercurrent and the phase difference across the
superconducting structure. The first Josephson equation [1.1] states that the Current Phase
Relationship (CPR) is sinusoidal; however, it is not generally true. If the length of the nanobridge
(L) is smaller than both the coherence length (ξ) and the magnetic field penetration depth (λ) of the
superconducting film, the classical sinusoidal dependence of the supercurrent I0 on the phase
difference ϕ between the two superconductor electrodes is preserved.

I0 (ϕ ) =

π ∆L ∆R
4e RN T

sin(ϕ )

(30)

38

Where ∆L and ∆R are the superconducting order parameters of the left and right superconductors, T
is the temperature and RN is normal state resistance (Aslamazov and Larkin model) [121].
Likharev and Yakobson [122] studied the effects of an increasing nanobridge length on both critical
current and CPR. They founded that by increasing the nanobridge lengths, the critical current
initially diminishes tending to a constant value when L>8 ξ. The CPR also depends on the ratio
between the bridge effective length L and the coherence length ξ of superconducting film. In
particular, for L/ξ >1, a deformation of the CPR from sinusoidal shape proportional to the L/ξ ratio
itself occurs. Pei et al. [123] observed such CPR deformations in indium microbridges.
For L>3.5 ξ, the CPR becomes multivalued with a shape close to that given by the curve:
I S (ϕ ) =Ic

ϕ ξ(T )

2
2
Φ0   ξ( T )  3 
 ϕ ξ(T )  
 =
 ϕ 
1 − 
ϕ − 
 L 

  L   2π LK 

L

(31)

Where Lk is the kinetic inductance given by the (29). The transition from single to multivalued
CPR, determines the onset of a hysteresis in the I-V characteristic.
Note that, both Aslamazov-Larkin and Likharev-Yakobson predictions are valid only close to the
critical temperature of the superconductors being based on Gizburg-Landau theory.
Recent numerical calculations of CPR as a function of L/ξ ratio based on the analysis of Likharev
and Yacobson are reported in the references [124-126]. They numerically solved the equations (32)
and (33) derived by the reduced Ginzburg–Landau differential equations:
L

ξ

1

da

= 2∫
a0

a02 −

4

2
0
2
0

1

2
0

da

ϕ = 2 j 0ξ ∫
a0

(32)

a
j
j
a( x )
2
+
− a(x ) +
−
2
2 a
2
a(x )
4
0

a 02 a 02 −

a
j
j
a(x )
2
+
− a(x ) +
−
2
2 a
2
a(x )
4
0

2
0
2
0

4

(33)

2
0

Where a(x) is a function so that a(0)=a(L)=1; in the region of the nanobridge a(x)<1 and has its
minimum a0 at the centre of the bridge (a(L/2)=a0) [125]. j0 and ϕ are the scaled current density
39

and the phase difference across the Dayem bridge respectively. For a given L/ξ

Fig.14 a) Current-phase relationship for different L/ξ ratio calculated by numerically solving the
equation (32) and (33). For L/ξ greater than 3.5, the curve becomes double valued. b) Maximum
critical current as a function of the L/ξ ratio (adapted from [126]).
ratio, by varying the a0 parameter in (32), the corresponding j0 values is found by using a scalar
nonlinear zero finding function. The pairs (a0, j0) are substituted in the (33) to find the
corresponding phase values. The pairs (ϕ, j0) are used to build a current-phase curve PL/ξ(ϕ). Fig.
14a reports the CPRs for L/ξ ranging from 1 and 8; we can see that the CPR is sinusoidal for L/ξ=1
and becomes double value for L/ξ>3.5 giving rise the occurrence of hysteresis in the currentvoltage characteristic. The Fig. 14b shows the maximum critical current I0 as a function of the L/ξ
ratio, showing an exponential-like decay of the I0. The saturation value, reached for L ≈ 8ξ ,
corresponds to the depairing critical current density of an infinitely long superconducting wire
[122], in this case IS/IC=(2√3)/9.
We would like to emphasize that the hysteresis in the Josephson weak link like the nanobridge is a
controversial issue. In fact, many researches address such behaviour to a thermal effect that is, when
the nanobridge switch in the resistive state, the Joule dissipation leads to a local temperature
increase causing a decrease of the Ic and a consequent hysteresis in the I-V characteristic. Skocpol
et al [127], carried out a detailed experimental and theoretical study about the thermal effects in
superconducting nanobridge. They provided a model based on the self-heating hotspot to describe
40

the nanobridge I-V characteristics exhibiting hysteresis. As will be shown later, to avoid the thermal
hysteresis, some nanoSQUIDs are fabricated by depositing on the superconducting film a normal
film that act as a thermal shunt.
As regard as the behaviour of the CPR as a function of the temperature, the first predictions were
made by Kulik and Omelyanchuk (KO-1 theory) [128] who considered a one-dimensional wire
connecting two superconductors. The wire had a length L<<(ξl)1/2 (dirty limit) and a width w<<L,
where l is the electronic mean free path. In the dirty limit case is possible to use the Usadel
equations [129], to simplify the complicated general equations of the stationary superconductivity
based on the quantum field theory [130,131]. For a symmetric junction formed by identical
superconductors, they derived the following formula, which allows to calculate the CPR at arbitrary
temperature:
IS =

4π T
∆ cos(ϕ / 2 )
∆ sin (ϕ / 2 )
arctan
∑
e R N ω >0 ∆2 cos 2 (ϕ / 2) + ω 2
∆2 cos 2 (ϕ / 2 ) + ω 2

(34)

Where ω = π T (2 n + 1 ) are the Matsubara frequency. The curves IS(ϕ) are non sinusoidal at low
temperatures, reducing to the Aslamazov-Larkin result for T → Tc. On the other hand, we note that
the ξ(T) increases with the temperature, so, for a fixed bridge length, an increase of the temperature
leads to a decrease of the ratio L/ξ(T). Therefore, we expect to observe a greater deformation of the
CPR by decreasing the temperature.
Direct measurement of the temperature dependent CPR on niobium nanobridge were performed by
Troeman et al. [132]. They observed a deformation from Josephson-like sinusoidal characteristics at
high temperatures to saw-tooth shaped curves at intermediate and multivalued relationships at low
temperatures.
Note that, the conditions of the K-O1 theory are not easily feasible in the practice. In fact, if we
consider an Al nanobridge (10-30 nm thick), 1 nm long, the resulting coherence length is about 30
nm, so that (ξ(0)l )1/2≈ 5.5 nm making the short limit difficult to achieve with the available nanolithographic tools. Few years ago, Vijay et al computed the CPR [133] for Al nanobridges having a
41

length comparable to the coherence length at T=0 and inserted between two-dimensional (2D) and
three-dimensional (3D) superconducting electrodes. They used the general theory of Gor’kov [130,
131] in the diffusive limit and numerically solved the Usadel equations for both cases. They
considered a bridge width of 45 nm, a length L ranging from 15 to 240 nm and a temperature of 0.15
K. In the 2D case, the CPR had a nearly linear behaviour also for the smallest bridge length (L=15
nm), while in the three dimensional case the CPR resembles a slight distorted sinusoid and becomes
more linear as the bridge length increases. They computed also a two dimensional map of the phase
within the superconducting structure (nanobridge and banks). Their calculations showed a
logarithmic phase evolution in the bridge and the banks in the 2D case, whereas in the 3D case the
phase varies mostly in the bridge region and quickly reached the imposed value in the banks within
a few ξ(0). In the latter case, the electrodes act as a phase reservoir, leading to an almost sinusoidal
CPR. On the contrary, in the 2D case, there is no phase reservoir and the structure resembles a
superconducting wire with a linear CPR.
Since it is very difficult to fabricate niobium nanobridges having dimensions smaller or equal to the
coherence length, most of the theoretical predictions based on standard dc-SQUID theory are
usually unreliable and these devices exhibit characteristics that do not resemble those of standard
SQUIDs.
2.5 NanoSQUID performance predictions
To describe the operation of a SQUID based on nanobridges, the equations 11 have to be solved by
using the CPR of the nanobridges instead the sinusoidal one.
dϕ
i
+ j = PL / ξ (ϕ1 ) + 1 + i n1
2
dτ
dϕ
i
− j = PL / ξ (ϕ 2 ) + 2 + in 2
2
dτ

j=

(35)

(ϕ1 − ϕ 2 ) − 2πφ e

πβ

42

v( τ ) =

1  d( ϕ1 + ϕ 2 ) 

2 
dτ


PL/ξ (ϕ) strongly depends on the ratio L/ξ as shown in Fig. 14a. Again, the noise term is given by the
Nyquist noise in the normal resistance of the SQUID.

Fig.15 a) Critical current as a function of the external magnetic flux for L/ξ=4 and different βL
values. b) Critical current dependence on βL for different L/ξ values (adapted from [126]).
The static characteristics of the SQUID were studied by K. Hasselbach et al [124] and by Podd at al
[125]. They numerically solved the equations (35) for V=0 (v=0, in1=in2 =0) and found the critical
current as a function of the external magnetic flux for different L/ξ values.

43

The results of their simulations are reported in figures 15. The Ic-Φe for L/ξ=4 are reported in Fig.
15a for different βL values. The curves are triangular-like for high βL values and becomes smoother
by decreasing the βL value. It is worth to note that, also for very low βL values, the critical current
does not reaches the zero value as in a conventional SQUID. This is more evident in the figure 15b,
showing the modulation depth ∆Ic/Ic as a function of βL value for different L/ξ ratios. By decreasing
the L/ξ values, the modulation depth increases approaching the value 1 for L/ξ=1 corresponding to
the standard sinusoidal case. Therefore, the highly non-sinusoidal CPR leads to both a reduced
modulation depth and a triangular shape dependence of the critical current on the applied magnetic
flux. Hasselbach et al. [124] studied also the temperature dependence of the critical current in both
niobium and aluminium based microSQUIDs. In both case, they found that the increase of the Ic by
decreasing the temperature is appreciably greater than the sinusoidal CPR case. The theoretical
predictions were in good agreement with the experimental data.
Granata et al. [126] solved numerically equation (35) for V≠0. In particular, their analysis was
focused on the non-hysteretic regime that is L/ξ ranged from 1 to 3.5. As concern as other
parameters, since their analysis regarded nano-SQUIDs having very small loop inductance a
reasonable value, βL = 0.05, was assumed. It corresponds to a SQUID critical current less than 100
µA, which is a reasonable upper limit for the non-hysteretic nano-SQUIDs [132]. A noise parameter

Γ of 0.02 was chosen in correspondence to L/ξ = 1, and it was progressively increased up to 0.046
for L/ξ = 3.5, taking into account the decrease of the critical current for increasing L/ξ ratios (see
Fig. 14b). In such a way, it is possible to compare the device with different Dayem bridge lengths.
In the computational scheme, the PL/ξ (ϕ) is an external function which is recalled to each
computation step. In figure 16a, the voltage-flux characteristics corresponding to three different L/ξ
value are reported. The computation was performed considering an incremental step of the external
magnetic flux of 0.005 Φ0. The two curve sets correspond to two bias current values. An evident
decrease of the voltage amplitude is observed by increasing L/ξ values. Figure 16b reports the VΦ
44

as a function of the bias current for different L/ξ ratios. They have been computed by evaluating the
derivative of the V-Φ characteristics at Φ e=Φ 0/4.

Fig.16 a) Voltage vs. magnetic flux characteristics corresponding to three different L/ξ values,
computed for two different values of bias current. b) Flux-to-voltage transfer factor VΦ as a
function of the bias current for different L/ξ ratios obtained by evaluating the derivative of the V-Φ
characteristics at Φe= Φ0 /4 (adapted from [126]).
As well as the V-Φ curves, also the VΦ values decrease by increasing the L/ξ ratio. Similarly to
conventional SQUIDs, the VΦ curves show a steep slope for low bias current, a maximum for a bias
current lower than the critical current (about 75% of Ic), and a smooth slope for high bias current. It
is also possible to observe a shift of the maxima toward high bias currents for increasing L/ξ ratios,
due to the different critical current modulation depths. The spectral densities of the voltage white
noise as a function of the bias current for L/ξ ratio ranging from 1 to 3.5 are reported in figure 17a.
As for the VΦ computation, also in this case, the external magnetic flux was set to a value of Φ0/4.
As shown in Fig.17a, the noise increases by increasing the bridge length. Also in this case, it is
possible to observe a shift of the maxima due to the same reason given above for the VΦ curves.
Figure 17b reports the power spectral density of the flux noise SΦ as a function of the bias current
for the same range of L/ξ values. It was obtained by taking the ratio between the voltage noise and
the responsivity square at Φa=Φ0/4. As expected, the noise increases by increasing the ratio L/ξ.
45

Fig.17 a) Power spectral densities of the voltage noise as a function of the bias current. The SV
values have been taken in the white region of the spectrum. b) Power spectral densities of the
magnetic flux noise (SΦ) as a function of the bias. It has been obtained by computing the ratio
between the voltage noise and the square of responsivity. For both figures, L/ξ ratio ranges from 1
to 3.5 and the external magnetic flux bias is Φe= Φ0 /4 (adapted from [126]).
An empirical expression of the white flux noise was derived from the above simulations [126]:
4

Φ 30 
L 3
 A(Γ)   + B(Γ)
SΦ =
2πI 0 R 

ξ 



(36)

where A(Γ) and B(Γ) are numerical coefficient which depend on Γ value. It was obtained by fitting
the behaviour of the flux noise as a function of L/ξ value. The predictions of the described noise
theory were successfully employed to fit some experimental noises data found in the literature.

2.6 Flux coupling and spin sensitivity computation
As seen in the section 2.2, the transfer or coupling factor between the magnetic dipole and SQUID
is needed to evaluate the spin sensitivity of the nanosensor. In section 2.2 we have considered the
simple case of the magnetic dipole co-planar with the SQUID and lying in the loop centre. In this
section, we will take into account a more general case where the position of the magnetic dipole can
vary within the loop and the distance from the SQUID plane in not zero. This issue has been
46

extensively studied [106-107, 110-111, 133-140] and useful results have been obtained. First, we
will discuss about the filamentary model already mentioned in the section 2.2; namely, square [110]
or circular [137] loop of the nanoSQUID is assumed as a dimensionless wire and the magnetic flux
is obtained by calculating the line integral of the vector potential along the SQUID loop line. We
will start to consider the square loop case; the results obtained in the case of circular loop are very
similar. Let us consider a magnetic moment mz oriented along the z-direction and positioned in a
generic position (x’,y’z’) (Fig.12), the Cartesian components of the magnetic vector potential A(r)
at position r(x,y,z), are:

Ax = −

µ 0 m z ( y − y' )
;
4π rr − rr ' 3

Ay =

µ 0 m z ( x − x' )
4π rr − rr ' 3

(37)

|r-r’| = [(x-x’)2+(y-y’)2+(z-z’)2] ½. By executing the line integral (equation 25), taking into account
the contributions of the four sides of the square loop, we obtain the magnetic flux threading the loop
produced by a magnetic moment mz as a function of its position within the loop:
−L / 2
 −L / 2
µ m 
(L / 2 − y' )
(L / 2 + x' )
Φ µ (x' , y' , z' ) = 0 z − dx
− dy
3/ 2
3
/
2
2
2
4π 
(x − x' ) + (L / 2 − y' ) + z' 2
(L / 2 + x' )2 + ( y − y' )2 + z' 2
L/ 2
 L/ 2

∫ [

+

]

∫ [

]

L/2

L/ 2



−L / 2

−L / 2



∫

(L / 2 + y' )
+
dx
2
[(x − x' ) + (L / 2 + y' )2 + z' 2 ]3 / 2

∫

(L / 2 − x' )

dy
3
/
2
2
2
[(L / 2 − x' ) + ( y − y' ) + z' 2 ] 
(38)

Note that for x ' = y ' = z ' = 0 , the equation (38) reduces to equation (26).
In the Fig.18, the normalized magnetic flux distribution valued over the SQUID loop and relative to
a magnetic moment mz at height z’=0.05 L, is reported. Since the z’ value is much smaller than the
loop side length L, the magnetic particle can be reasonably considered in the plane of the loop and
no field divergence arises in correspondence of the loop edges. As shown in the figure, the magnetic
flux is strongly dependent on the spin position within the loop; in particular, the higher values are
obtained when the spin is close to the sensor edges reaching the maximum values in the corners of
the ring. In order to have an estimation of the flux coupling as a function of its position within the
47

nanoSQUID sensitive area for different distances from the SQUID plane, the normalized magnetic
flux coupling over the diagonal of the square loop for different z’ values is reported in Fig.19a

Fig.18 Normalized magnetic flux distribution threading the sensor square loop produced by a
magnetic moment mz oriented along the z-axis (arranged as in fig.12), as a function of its position
within the sensor capture area for z’=0.05 L.
From a practical point of view, a distance z’ ranging from 10 nm to 40 nm takes reasonably into
account the thickness of both passivation layer and the nano-objects size. Figure 19b reports the
spin noise as function of the spin position along the loop diagonal for different z’ values, computed
by using the equation (27) and assuming a magnetic flux noise of 1 µΦ0/Hz1/2. As shown in the
figure, there is an appreciable enhancement of the sensitivity near the perimeter of the loop. For a
large z’/L values, the magnetic flux coupling and spin noise tend to a constant value, indicating that
they no longer depend on the spin position as also shown in simulations of scanning SQUID
microscopy [66, 133, 141-143].
Similar calculations, for square loop having an area ranging from (400x400) nm2 to (25x25) nm2,
were made by Volarick and Lam [144]. They considered a magnetic moment of 300 µB and a
distance above the nanoSQUID plane in the range (0-100) nm.

48

Fig.19 Normalized magnetic flux coupling (a) and normalized spin noise spectral density Sn1/2 (b) as
a function of the position within the loop computed along a diagonal of the nanoSQUID loop for
different z’/L values.
Tilbrok performed the calculations in the case of a circular loop [137] following the same procedure
reported above but using spherical coordinates. The total flux due to a magnetic moment oriented
along the z-axis, is given by:

Φµ =

 r mz 
µ0
a
1
 2k 
 2 k 
 2k  
(
1
+
k
)
K
E
a
E
−
+





 mz 


π (z' 2 + r 2 + a 2 )3 2 ( 1 + k ) 1 − k  k 
 k − 1
 k − 1 
 k − 1 

(39)
Where a is the loop radius, r and z’ are the x-ordinate and the height of the dipole above the x-y
plane respectively, k = 2 a r / ( z ’ 2 + r 2 + a 2 ) and finally, K [ 2 k / ( k - 1 )] , E [ 2 k / ( k - 1 )] are elliptic
integrals of the first and second kinds respectively. For r = 0 (dipole on the axis of symmetry), k = 0
and the (39) assumes the simplified form:
a 2 π 0 mz
Φµ =
2 (a 2 + z ' 2 ) 3 / 2

(40)

Therefore, for any given height z’, there is an optimum nanoSQUID loop radius a=z’√2 that
maximize the (40). This is useful information because in many situations the height will be
constrained by experimental limitations. He considered also the case of a magnetic moment oriented

49

in the x direction finding that the magnetic coupling is very low, except for magnetic moment near
the perimeter of the loop.
It is worth to stress that the filamentary model used in the above calculation is based on equation
(27) that involves a line integral over a loop, which is a closed mathematical line of zero thickness.
On the other hand, the SQUID is a physical device with a finite thickness, so, more detailed
considerations about the magnetic field-SQUID interaction should be taken into account. Therefore,
these simulations are mainly suitable for very thin film nanoSQUIDs.
Moreover, the filamentary model does not consider flux focusing due to finite width of the
superconducting tracks [110,145]. For a circular loop, such increasing can be approximately
evaluated as Aeff=Αg [(1+Λ(T)/a)] 2 where Λ(T)=λ2(T)/d is the two-dimensional effective
penetration depths [146], λ(T) is the London penetration depth at the temperature T, d is the
superconducting film thickness and Ag is the geometrical area of the SQUID loop. With typical
values of loop radius and film thickness employed in nano-SQUID fabrication, the correction factor
may not be negligible. However, this effect does not appreciably modify the behaviour of the flux
lines within the sensor loop (except close to the sensor edges), so we can consider the area of the
sensor under investigation as an effective area, which includes the flux capture area increasing.
The coupling factor calculation of Bouchiat [138] was based on a different approach: the Lorentz
reciprocity theorem [147]. It stands for electromagnetism in a linear isotropic medium: the sources
and the created fields can be interchanged. In this case, it is equivalent to consider the case of
evaluation of the magnetic field created by the SQUID loop at the dipole position r instead of
calculation of the flux generated by the dipole and threaded by the loop.
Bouchiat [138] explored in a quantitatively way also other coupling geometries, including the case
where the assembly of spins sits directly on the nanobridge (Fig. 20), as already proposed by
Wernsdorfer et al some years before [107]. His simulations show that the greatest coupling
efficiency is obtained when a nanobridge acts as active detecting element. In this case (near field

50

regime, z<<L) the sensitive part is no longer the loop but the weak link itself and the original
Ketchen’s formula (28) has to be replaced by:
S n1 / 2 =

S Φ1 / 2
S 1/ 2 4 r
= Φ
Φµ
α µ0 µ B

(41)

Where r2 is the section of the nanobridge and α is a geometrical factor which depends on the
nanobridge size and the distance from it. For r = 25 nm (nanobridge) and r = 1 nm (nanotube), the
geometrical factor α assumes the values of 0.06 and 0.03 respectively (Fig. 20c) [138]. In the ideal
case of a magnetic dipole in direct contact to a very small nanobridge section (r →0), α tends to 1/2.
It corresponds to the case where half of the magnetic flux lines are threaded by the nanobridge (Fig
20b).

Fig.20 a) and b) Scheme of two different way to couple a magnetic moment to a SQUID: in the
centre of nanoSQUID (standard Ketchen’s scheme) or directly on the top of nanobridges. c)
Coupling factor α as a function of the distance z’ from the SQUID plane for a magnetic moment mz
51

traveling along a trajectory tangent to the nanobridge. The red and the black curve are relative to
two different nanobridge cross section. The green curve refers to a moment mz traveling along the z
symmetry axis (adapted from [138]).
Starting from energetic considerations, Nagel et at [139] reached the same Bouchiat’s results. They
showed that the calculation of the magnetic flux per magnetic moment (Φµ/µ) coupled into the
SQUID loop is equivalent to calculate the three-dimensional magnetic field distribution produced
by the SQUID loop treaded by an arbitrary current. Using an upgraded version of such calculation
method, a detailed study of spin sensitivity for high critical temperature nanoSQUIDs based on
YBCO grain boundary junctions was recently carried out by Wolbing et al. [140]. They calculated
both the magnetic flux noise and the coupling factor and derived an explicit expression for the spin
sensitivity as a function of the geometrical and electrical parameters of their nanodevices. They
showed that a spin sensitivity of few µB/Hz1/2 could be reached if the nanoparticle was placed 10
nm above the centre of the nanoconstriction with its magnetic moment perpendicular to the grain
boundary and oriented in the plane of the SQUID loop.
Based on the above results, we can say that a suitable spin sensitivity can be obtained by either
decreasing the SQUID loop or using constrictions as small as possible. As will be shown in the next
section, both criteria has taken into consideration to develop high sensitive nanoSQUID.
3. NanoSQUIDs: fabrication and performance
In this section, we will describe the main nanoSQUIDs based on nanobridges reporting the design
criteria, the main characteristic and the performance. We will also describe other nanoSQUID types
stressing the advantages and the disadvantage with respect to nanobridge SQUIDs. In particular, we
will deal with nanoSQUID based on: sandwich type nanojunctions, carbon nanotubes, high critical
temperature (YBCO) and MgB2 superconductors. In addition, we will describe nanoSQUID built on
an apex of nanometric tip and those based on graphene and diamond materials.

52

3.1 Nanofabrication techniques
There are two different approaches to realize nanosized objects. The first is to scale down a bulk
material (top-down approach) the second is to assemble the nanoscale elements. Mainly, a
nanoSQUID is fabricated by using the first approach exploiting the abilities of the Electron Beam
Lithography (EBL) [149] or the Focused Ion Beam (FIB) [150] sculpting to realize nanostructures.
The aforementioned techniques are used together with thin film deposition process, optical
photolithography and other techniques usually used in standard fabrication of micro device.
However, these aspects will be no addressed in the following, limiting the analysis to the
fundamental aspects of EBL and FIB techniques. However, even if most of nanoSQUIDs are
fabricated by using the above-cited techniques, it is worth to mention that a technique based on
Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) has been successfully employed to fabricate SQUID based on
nanobridges [151, 152]. This technique involves local anodization of superconductor films under
the voltage-biased tip of the AFM.
3.1.1 Electron Beam Lithography (EBL)
The Electron Beam Lithography (EBL) is a technique allowing to create pattern having a resolution
down to 10-20 nm or less [153] by using a beam of electrons to define a nanometric structure in an
electron sensitive resist deposited on a sample. The exposed pattern becomes soluble in a specific
removal leaving the sample uncovered along the same pattern. The purpose, as with
photolithography, is to create very small structures in the resist that subsequently can be transferred
to the substrate material, by lift-off process or etching.
The electron beam is generated in the column by an electron source and focused by two or more
lenses. Under the column, a vacuum chamber houses high-resolution mechanical stages to move the
sample under the beam and to expose step-by-step the substrates under the relatively narrow field of
focus of the electron beam.
The emission of electrons can be made by thermionic way but for higher resolution beam a field
emission sources is required. The size of the source determines the amount of demagnification that
53

has to be applied to have small spot at the target. The electrons beam are focused by using
electrostatic force to obtain the convergence of the beam. However, electrostatic lenses usually
produce higher aberrations, therefore magnetic lens are preferred to focus the beam. The spherical
and chromatic aberrations can be minimized by reducing the convergence angle with the
consequent confinement of the electrons into the centre of the lenses even if it leads to a reduction
of beam current.
By using a magnetic lens, the divergence of the magnetic flux can be exploited in the focusing
action causing a rotation of the electrons (and the image) along Z-axis that does not affect the
performance of the lens, but the design, alignment and operation of the system.
Other optical elements include aperture, deflection systems, alignments coils, blanking plates and
stigmators. Deflection of the electron beam is used to scan the beam across the surface of the
sample. Typically, for very small beam deflections electrostatic lenses are used, larger beam
deflections require electromagnetic scanning. Deflecting the beam off axis introduces additional
aberrations like the spot shape distortion and deviations from linearity. These effects are less
evident if a magnetic deflection is used. A stigmator is used to balance the imperfections in the
creation and alignment of the electron beam.
Typically, the writing field is of the order of 100 µm – 1 mm while for larger patterns a movable
stage is required. In this case, the accuracy of the stage is a critical point in order to avoid stitching
phenomena and to realize exact overlaying in aligning different patterns.
When the beam interacts with the resist, some electrons can scatter along small angles leading to
broaden the beam diameter. During the penetration toward the substrate, the electrons can scatter by
a large angle (backscattering) causing the proximity effect in which the specific pattern area can be
influenced by the electrons scattered in the close areas. In the meantime, the electrons are slowed
down progressively, producing a cascade of low voltage electrons (secondary electrons). Forward
scattering can be reduced by using a thin film of resist and the high accelerating voltage. The
secondary electrons, having a low energy, contribute, as the forward scattering, to enlarge the beam
54

diameter resulting in a loss of resolution with respect to the expected one. Some secondary electrons
can preserve higher energy and contribute to the proximity effect. Note that there are several
techniques to fix the proximity effect like, just to cite, the dose modulation, pattern biasing, GHOST
or software methods.
3.1.2 Focused Ion Beam (FIB)
With respect to EBL technique, the Focused Ion Beam (FIB) uses a beam of ions instead electrons
to induce a solubility change along a nanometric pattern of a resist distributed on a sample [150].
More frequently, the FIB is used as a sculpting technique exploiting the milling process due to the
collisions of the ions with atoms of the structure, thus avoiding the use of any kind of resist. In fact,
since the mass of the atom is comparable with those of the incident ion, a large amount of ion
energy is transferred to the atom that acquire enough energy and speed to leave the lattice sites.
Furthermore, the FIB can be used also for ion beam-induced deposition and chemical reaction of
surface species. Since the Ion Beam Lithography (IBL) is very similar to EBL technique, in the
following, only the sculpting technique will be briefly addressed, leaving aside the deposition and
chemical reaction techniques.
The obtainable spatial resolution is of the order of the beam diameter, typically of about one
hundred of nanometres. The milling rate increases as the beam current increase, while for a more
precise milling, a small beam spot is required that is obtained using a small beam current. In
addition, the rate depends on the mass of the atom and its binding energy to the lattice.
Similarly to the EBL, a suitable source generates the ion beam that is then focused in the optics
column. Such a source can be gaseous, in which the gas molecules irradiated by an electron beam
becomes ionized. In such a way, the ions are emitted from a relatively large area. For a point source
and a limited angle of emission, a field ionization source has to be used. In this case, the sources
operate by desorption of ions from a sharp tip in a strong electric field. A high efficiency can be
reached by using liquid metal ion source in which a thin needle or a capillary is wetted by a thin
film of liquid source metal, which has been heated to the liquid state. Typically, the gallium is
55

employed due to its low melting temperature and high brightness of obtained ion beam. Moreover,
the Gallium has a mass large enough to sputter a wide range of materials.
The focusing of ion beam is obtained by using electrostatic lens consisting of electrodes operated at
high potentials. The electric fields generated by these lenses are used to deflect and accelerate the
ion beam whose diameter is influenced by the chromatic aberration, due to the energy spread
between the emitted ions. The same diameter, although to a lesser extent, is influenced also by the
spherical aberration due to the different path length of the ions from the source to the lens. In
particular, the beam diameter results larger than the expected one.
Despite the beam diameter is of the order of one hundreds of nanometres, exploiting the nonhomogeneity of the ion beam and overlapping the beam profiles, structures having dimensions less
than the beam diameter can be realized.
The collisions between ions and atoms of the substrate or resist generate both forward and
backward scattering that are responsible of beam broadening leading to a loss of resolution in the
resist exposure. Furthermore, the collisions cause a trajectory deflection displacing the atom from
the lattice sites. It leads to a formation of an amorphous layer or causes the implantation of the
primary ions in the interstitial lattice. This is an important issue during the milling usage of FIB
because the damaged layer may have different mechanical or electric properties that have to be
taken into account in the realized nanostructures. As example, in the case of superconductors, the
damaged layer can lose the superconducting state.
Nevertheless, the absence of any kind of resist and relative lift-off or etching processes together
with the reducing of number of fabrication steps represents an important advantage with respect to
EBL technique, especially if the effects of damaged layer can be neglected or eliminated, for
instance, by an anodization process.
3.2 NanoSQUID based on Dayem nanobridges
In this section, most of nanoSQUID types fabricated by EBL or FIB and relative performance are
discussed, following the same chronological order of their publishing.
56

As seen in the section 2.1, the first SQUID having an effective flux capture area much smaller than
1 µm2 (Fig.21), was developed by Lam and Tilbrook [108]. By using EBL technique, they
fabricated a niobium based nanoSQUID having an hole size of 200 nm and nanobridges with a
width and a length in the range of 70-200 nm. The nanoSQUID was fabricated starting from a
bilayer of Niobium/Gold having a thickness of 20 and 25 nm respectively.

Fig. 21 a) SEM image of First nanoSQUID having an effective flux capture area much smaller than
1 µm2, b) Current-voltage characteristics measured at T=4.2 K with and without gold thermal
shunt (adapted from [108]).
The Au layer was used as both a mask for etching the Nb film and as a resistive shunt in the
completed devices. The nano-SQUID had a washer shape in order to improve the heat dissipation
occurring when operated in resistive mode. Two Dayem nano-bridges constituted the lateral arms
of the washer, so it was different with respect to the typical washer loop and, therefore, the flux
focusing effect [86] was less effective. Dayem bridges had a hyperbolic shape; therefore, the
effective length can be significantly larger than the geometrical one. Fig. 21b shows the I-V
characteristics with and without the gold layer, showing that the hysteresis disappears in the
presence of shunt. The measured magnetic flux noise was 7×10-6 µΦ0/Hz1/2 corresponding to a spin
sensitivity of 250 µB/Hz1/2 calculated by using the equation (28). In a later article [153], a slight
noise improvement on the same nanoSQUID type was obtained. A magnetic flux noise of 5×10-6

57

µΦ0/Hz1/2 was reported and there was no significant increase in the noise level by applying a static
magnetic field up to 2 mT .
A year later, Troeman et al [154], fabricated niobium nanoSQUIDs having an effective area
ranging from of 3.6×10-2 µm2 to 900 µm2 by using FIB milling technique (Fig. 22a). They obtained
critical currents of 4-25 µA and flux sensitivities of 40-200 µV/Φ0 (Fig. 22 b and c) for sensors
based on 80 nm wide, 50 nm thick, and 150 nm long nano-bridges. The inductance of the smallest
device, due mainly to the kinetic inductance of the bridges, was 150 pH. It was the first
nanoSQUID fabricated by FIB technique and even though, the resolution of the used FIB system
was modest, the small sizes of the realized device and its quality proved the potential of the
technique. As mentioned in the previous section, the gallium implantation during the FIB process
leads to a suppression of the superconducting properties. However, as shown by Troeman et al., the
damage of the superconductive materials in not crucial if at least a 50 nm thick niobium is
employed. At same time, the slight damage leads to a non-hysteretic device. The reported magnetic
flux noise was 1.5 µΦ0/Hz1/2 for a device with an area of 900 µm2.

Fig. 22 a) Picture of niobium based nanoSQUID having an effective area of 0.036 µm2, fabricated
by focused ion beam technique. b) Current-voltage characteristics measured by applying different
values of magnetic field. c) Voltage – magnetic field curves corresponding to different bias current
values. The measurements were performed at T=4.2 K (adapted from [154]).

58

Combining conventional optical lithography and ion etching with a subsequent FIB milling step,
Hao et al. [155-157], Romans et al. [158], Rozhko et al. [159] and recently, Patel et al. [160]
fabricated ultra low noise nanoSQUIDs based on a Niobium/Tungsten (Nb/W) bilayer. The design
and fabrication parameters employed were: loop diameter ranging from 200 nm to 800 nm,
niobium thickness of 70-200 nm, tungsten thickness of 150 nm and nanobribridge size of 65-80 nm
in width and 60-80 nm in length. A SEM image of one of their nanoSQUIDs is reported in the Fig.
22a [155]. As in the Lam’s device, the W layer acts as both thermal shunt and resistive shunt
eliminating the hysteresis in the I-V characteristic (Fig. 22b) and provides, in addition, protection
against the ion beam damages.

Fig. 23 a) Scanning electron micrograph of a Dayem bridge based nanoSQUID made of
niobium/tungsten bilayer. b) Current-voltage characteristic of the nanoSQUID measured at
T=4.65 K. c) Magnetic flux noise spectral density measured at T=6.8 K (adapted from [155]).

59

With respect to Au film, the W film exhibits a high resistivity and it is temperature independent. At
T=6.8 K, the nanosensor showed a magnetic flux noise as low as 0.2 µΦ0/Hz1/2 (Fig. 22c). It was
measured in a flux-locked loop mode using a 16 SQUID series array [44, 161,162] to pre-amplify
the nanoSQUID output signal.
NanoSQUIDs have a flux capture area less than 1 µm2, so high magnetic fields (10-50 mT) are
needed to measure the voltage–flux characteristics and to tune the device at its optimal working
point. Typically, large coils wound outside the tail of the Dewar and permanent magnets are used to
provide the magnetic fields for the device calibration and to identify the flux state of the sensor.
Nevertheless, the magnetic field values provided by a standard set-up sometimes cannot be larger
enough to fulfil the characterization requirements of the device, due to the occurrence of Joule
heating of the coils. In order to solve this problem, Granata et al [163] developed an integrated
nanoSQUIDs including two micrometric integrated niobium coils located very close to the
nanosensor (Fig. 24a) in order to modulate, tune and operate the SQUID in flux locked loop
configuration. With respect to external coils, the higher mutual inductance allows the effective
measurement of the voltage-flux characteristics as well as a suitable flux biasing of the SQUID to
obtain the maximum value of the flux to voltage transfer factor VΦ.

Fig. 24 a) Picture of the nanoSQUID device including the integrated coils for the sensor
modulation and tuning. In the inset, a SEM image of the SQUID loop and nanobridges are shown

60

(Adapted from [163]). b) Voltage-magnetic flux characteristic measured at T=4.2K (adapted from
[164]).
The device design is similar to that reported in ref. [108] and includes a niobium loop with a hole
of 200 nm interrupted by two bridges having a length and a width of 100 nm and 80 nm
respectively. They employed a bilayer Nb(30 nm)/Al (30 nm) patterned by EBL and shaped by liftoff process and reactive ion etching (RIE) which is a selective chemical dry etch. Also in this case,
the Al layer acts as both a resistive and thermal shunt and a self-aligned mask for the RIE process.
They obtained non-hysteretic characteristic at T=4.2 K, with a critical current of about 50 µA and a
modulation depth ∆Ic/Ic as high as 35%. Thanks to the integrated coils, they measured up to threevoltage oscillation as a function of the external magnetic flux (Fig. 24b). Due to high voltage
responsivity (about 1.5 mV/Φ0), a magnetic flux noise of 1.5 µΦ0/Hz1/2 was obtained by using a
standard low noise direct-coupled amplifier. The corresponding spin noise evaluated at the centre
of the loop was of 60 µB/Hz1/2 [164].
A higher critical current modulation depth was obtained by Vijay et al [165] by using an aluminium
nanoSQUID with three-dimensional contact banks (3D nanobridge SQUID). In such a
configuration, nanoSQUID was contacted with banks ticker than the bridges (Fig.25b).

Fig. 25 a, b) Atomic force micrograph of aluminium nanobridges between two contact pads having
a 2D or 3D structure. c, d) Critical current as a function of applied magnetic flux relative to the
61

nanoSQUIDs in 2D and in 3D structure respectively, measured at about 300 mK (adapted from
[165]).
The three-dimensional banks enhance nonlinearity by acting as good phase reservoirs and
confining the variation of the superconducting order parameter to the weak link [133] (see section
2.4.1). So, in the case of short nanobridge (L<ξ) the magnetic patterns can be described in term of
the analytical results of KO-1 theory [120, 128] for a diffusive weak link at zero temperature with a
phase variation constrained to the bridge region. They compared such a design with a standard one
where the contacted banks have the same thickness of the bridge (Fig.25a). The SQUID loop had
an area of 1.5 µm2 and a geometric inductance of L =5 pH. The bridges were 8 nm thick, 30 nm
wide and had a variable length ranging from 75 to 400 nm. At about 300 mK, the nanoSQUID,
fabricated by using EBL and lift-off process, exhibited a modulation depth as high as 70%
approaching to an ideal weak links behaviour (Fig.25c). As observed in the figure, the Ic-Φ
characteristics of nanoSQUID with three-dimensional banks is deeper and has more non-linearity
with respect the two dimensional device which exhibits a quite linear Ic-Φ pattern (Fig 25d). It is
indicative of a non-linear and almost linear CPR for 3D and 2D device respectively. Note that, the
presence of thick banks could prevent the operation of such device in large parallel magnetic field,
since the critical magnetic field decrease by increasing the superconducting film thickness.
However, Antler et al [166] demonstrate the successful operation of a similar nanoSQUID in an
applied in-plane magnetic fields up to 60 mT. Since this nanodevice shows hysteretic I-V, it
cannot be employed as a conventional magnetic flux to voltage transducer. Nevertheless, an ultra
low magnetic flux noise (17 nΦ0/Hz1/2) in the white region was obtained by operating the SQUID
in the dispersive mode [166,167]. The nanoSQUID was shunted by one chip capacitor to realize a
flux tunable resonator (Fig. 26).

62

Fig. 26 Scheme of the measurement circuit including the SQUID and a circulator with a RF drive
tone input, employed by Adler et al [166] to operate the nanoSQUID in a dispersive mode [167].
The input magnetic flux signal to measure induces a change in resonant frequency, which is read
out by microwave reflectometry [168]. Such a configuration allows a high bandwidth (about 100
MHz) while avoiding the dissipation associated with conventional nanoSQUID devices as typically
operated.
Most of nanomagnetism measurements require high magnetic fields (up to several T). Therefore, a
nanoSQUID for nanomagnetism applications should be able to operate in very high magnetic field.
The use of very thin superconducting film and a precise alignment system allows the use of
magnetic field large enough to perform nanoparticle magnetization measurements. However, the
vortex penetration at magnetic field much lower than the critical magnetic field of superconductors,
causes additional flux coupling into the SQUID and so a device performance degradation. In order
to overcome these problems, Lam et al. [169] fabricated a nanoSQUID with a very small capture
area (70×70 nm2). In their design, the washer was removed in order to eliminate vortex penetration
and trapping in the film near the nanoSQUID hole (Fig.27a). As shown in figure, the nanoSQUID
was obtained by making a small hole in superconducting submicron track having a width of 250
nm. The width of nanobridge was approximately 90 nm, while the thicknesses of bilayer Nb/Au
films were 20 and 25 nm respectively. Measurements of I-V and I-Φ characteristic were performed
in magnetic field applied both perpendicularly and parallel to the SQUID plane. They found that,
for a perpendicular magnetic field up to 150 mT, there is no flux shift periodicity indicating the
absence of the magnetic flux entry into the SQUID (Fig 27b).
63

Fig. 27 a) Scanning electron micrograph of the niobium based nanoSQUID coated with a gold
layer. b) Critical current as a function of magnetic field applied perpendicularly to the
nanoSQUID. The black arrows indicate the flux shift periodicity due to the magnetic flux entry into
the SQUID body. The measurement was performed at T=5K (adapted from [169]).
So, considering an alignment uncertainty of 5°, a parallel magnetic field up to 150mT/sen(5°)≅1.7 T
can be at least employed for nanomagnetism measurements. The magnetic noise of the nanosensor
was 5 µΦ0/Hz1/2 corresponding to 70 µB/Hz1/2 for a magnetic moment located at the centre of the
hole.
A further step forward was made by Chen et al. [170] that extended the possibility to perform
magnetization measurements up to 7 T. They employed a Nb nanoSQUID having a very thin
thickness (5.5 nm) ensuring a superconducting state even for 7 T in-plane applied magnetic field. In
addition, they employed a feedback circuit to increase the linear dynamic range (see section 4.1.2)
and a fine alignment of magnetic field in the plane of the SQUID [170].
Since the fabrication of nanoSQUIDs based on nanobridges without hysteresis in the I-V
characteristic at helium liquid temperature is not very reliable, the nanoSQUIDs in many case have
to employed as magnetic flux to current transducer as explained in the section 1.2. In this case, it is
appreciable to have a high magnetic flux to current transfer factor IΦ in order to improve both the
SNR and the magnetic flux resolution (see equation 7). In this framework, high sensitive niobium

64

nanoSQUIDs exhibiting a high current transfer factor were developed [171-176]. High IΦ values
were obtained by using a strong asymmetric current bias as proposed in a pioneering work of
Clarke and Paterson [177]. This is obtained by designing the SQUID with a strong loop inductance
asymmetry (Fig. 28a) [174].

Fig. 28 a) Scanning electron micrograph of a niobium based nanoSQUID surrounded by an
integrated coil for the modulation, calibration or feedback operations. In the inset, a zoom of the
SQUID loop and Dayem nanobridges is shown. b) Critical current as a function of the applied
magnetic flux, measured at T = 4.2 K. The curve tilting is due to the inductance loop asymmetry
(adapted from [174]).
This asymmetry produces a deformation of the I-Φ pattern (Fig.28b), in which one of two branches
becomes steeper yielding an increased slope. Since the IΦ is the slope of the I-Φ curve, such design
allows to increase the current responsivity improving SNR and the magnetic flux resolution.
Moreover, the inductance asymmetry causes an offset of the critical current peak (Fig.28b), which
could provide an advantage if the shift falls within linear region of the Ic-Φ characteristic. In this
case, it is not necessary to apply an additional magnetic flux to bias the SQUID at the maximum
responsivity point. The nanoSQUIDs reported in [174] consisted in a hole geometry with a flux
capture area of 0.5 µm2 and nanobridges with a width w of 60 nm and a length l of 140 nm. The
thickness of niobium film was 20 nm. The nanodevice included a micrometric integrated niobium
coils located very close to the nanosensor in order to modulate, to bias and to operate the
nanoSQUID in a feedback mode. The maximum current responsivity was 60 µA/Φ0, which is about
65

five times greater than the value of a symmetric device having the same modulation depth.
Considering a current measurement error Icn of about 0.01 µA, corresponding to about 1 part to 104
of the critical current, an overall flux noise (Φn=Ic,n/IΦ) of 0.16 mΦ0 was obtained. Other hysteretic
nanoSQUIDs were developed by the same group and reported in refs. [175,176].
An effective way to employ hysteretic nanoSQUIDs based on nanoconstrictions as flux to voltage
transducer was proposed by Hazra et al. [178]. Combining a suitable SQUID design with a readout
based on bias current modulation and a lock-in voltage amplifier, they obtained regular voltage
oscillations up to 20 mT within the temperature range from 230 mK to 1.5 K. The nanoSQUIDs
were based on 20 nm aluminium/80 nm niobium/25 nm tungsten trilayer and fabricated by EBL.
The top Al layer acts as an etch mask for lithographic definition of the SQUID structure, as well as
a protective layer against oxidation and as mentioned above has the role of limiting the power
dissipation. The tungsten layer induces a proximity effect in the Nb film lowering the critical
temperature that is a useful issue at very low temperature.

Fig. 29a) (a) Picture of a nano-SQUID made of aluminium-niobium-tungsten trilayer fabricated on
a Si wafer. b) Critical current as a function of applied magnetic flux. c) Voltage-magnetic flux

66

characteristics measured at T= 250 mK and relative to different bias current amplitudes (adapted
from [178]).
The nanodevice, reported in Fig 29a, had a loop area of 6.25 µm2, a length and width of the
nanobridges of 180 nm and 40 nm respectively. The I-V characteristics were hysteretic and the I-Φ
characteristics showed a typical triangular shape with crossing of the two branches of Ic (Fig.29b),
indicating that the superconducting property of the nanoSQUID was governed by the short
coherence length of Nb and the current-phase relationship was non sinusoidal. Biasing the device
with a sinusoidal current having amplitude a little bit greater than the critical current, regular V-Φ
characteristics were achieved (Fig. 29c). The voltage modulation and the voltage responsivity were
as high as 500 µV and 2 mV/Φ0 respectively while the magnetic flux noise was 5×10-5 µΦ0/Hz1/2.
To overcome the thermal hysteresis at ultra-low temperature, Blois et al developed a nanoSQUID
exploiting the proximity effect of a titanium-gold bilayer [179].

Fig. 30 a) SEM images of Ti/Au bilayer nanoSQUID with cooling fins. (b) Current–Voltage
characteristic measured at T = 100mK. The inset shows the voltage modulation as a function of
applied magnetic field (adapted from [179]).
Even if, the use of thin Au or Al shunt layers can reduce the hysteresis close to Tc thanks their
higher thermal conductivity, hysteresis still occurs below a significant fraction of Tc. In this
nanosensor, besides the thermal shunt, the gold layer depresses Tc of the nanobridge region via the
proximity effect so it can be tuned to match the desired operating temperature. The nanoSQUID
67

(Fig.30a) was fabricated by EBL and the nanobridges had a width and a length of 40 and 120 nm
respectively. They used a three-dimensional contact banks as in the nanoSQUID developed by
Vijay et al. [165]. Even in this case, the ticker titanium layer of the banks, increases the heat
extraction from the weak link regions and also reduces the kinetic inductance contribution of the
loop. In addition, they added cooling fins to the side of the loop (partly visible at top and bottom of
the image, Fig.30a) to further improve the usable bias range. The authors performed measurements
of I-V characteristics at ultra low temperature for different Au thickness and found that the
nanodevice were non-hysteretic down to 60 mK if the thickness of the normal metal was greater
than 23 nm. In the Fig.30b and 30c, the I-V and V-Φ characteristics measured at T=100 mK, are
reported. There is no hysteresis and the voltage oscillations are sinusoidal like. Due to the flux
focusing effect, the authors measured an effective flux capture area, of about 7.5 µm2, which is
greater than the geometrical area. The magnetic flux noise spectral density was 1.1 µΦ0/Hz1/2
corresponding to a spin sensitivity of about 60 µB/Hz1/2 for spins located at the centre of a circular
SQUID loop having the same effective area. This nanodevice provides a sensitive tool for studying
phase transitions and quantum phenomena at the nanoscale in coupled magnetic or superconducting
systems at ultra-low temperatures. It is well established that a nanoSQUID based on nanobridge
should have a bridge length smaller than the coherence length of the superconductor and a critical
magnetic field as high as possible. Hazra et al have addressed these issues in the development of
their nanodevices [180]. They developed a suspended-bridge nanoSQUID by using two
superconductors (Al and Nb). This has the advantage that the bridge is composed of Al with a long
coherence length, while the bulk of the SQUID consists of Nb/Al bilayer, with a relatively higher
critical temperature and critical magnetic field (Fig.31). The bilayer consisted of 30 nm thick Nb
and 25 nm thick Al. The suspended Al nanobridge is clearly shown in the Fig.31c where a high
contrast is used to evidence the suspended structure. It was obtained by using EBL and RIE in
Sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) atmosphere.

68

Fig. 31 a) Image of a nanoSQUID having suspended bridges. b, c) Particular of a suspendedbridge shown at different angle of viewing. d) Critical current as a function of applied magnetic
flux for different nanoSQUIDs made of Nb (red/*), Al (blue/o) and Nb/Al bilayer with the bridge of
Al only (black/+) (adapted from [180]).
They performed a considerable over-etch so that the Nb under the Al was completely removed. The
loop area of the SQUID was 6.25 µm2 while the bridge width and length were 60 and 230 nm
respectively. As expected, these nanoSQUID exhibited intermediate performance between the Al
and the Nb device as shown in the Fig.31d where a comparison of the I-Φ of three different device
are reported at T=250 mK. Being the I-V hysteretic, the ultimate noise performance is limited by
thermally activated switching out from zero voltage state. From the switching current distribution,
measured at 250 mK, a magnetic flux noise of 400 µ Φ0/Hz1/2 was estimated by using the equation
(18) with dI/dt =0.048 A/s, Ic=42 µA, and IΦ=17 µA/Φ0.
Before to conclude this section about the nanoSQUID based on Dayem nanobridges, we would
mention to a post fabrication mechanism to modify the critical current of such nanodevices. In fact,
the junction critical current can be controlled by hot photon injection by using Dayem nanobridge
with integrated heaters [125, 181-183]. In these devices, a current is injected into the heater causing
a local increase of the temperature of the nanobridge and, consequently, a decrease of the critical
current. The heater consists in a normal metal thin film separated from the superconductor by an
insulating layer.

69

Fig. 32 a) Scanning electron micrograph of dc-nanoSQUID with a superimposed Ti control layer.
The multilayered structure is depicted in the lower sketch. b) Maximum critical current value as a
function of the heater current. c) Modulation depth of critical current on varying of the maximum
critical current (adapted from [182]).
The nanoSQUID depicted in the Fig.32a has a loop area of 0.6 µm2 and two nanobridges 200 nm
long and 120 nm wide. It was fabricated by using EBL to pattern sputtered thin films of 50 nm thick
of Nb, 30 nm thick of Si02 (insulating layer) and 50 nm thick of Ti (heater). The chromium film is
used as a protective mask, during the RIE etching. The Fig.31b reports the critical current as
function of the control current flowing in the heater layer while the Fig.31c shows the modulation
depth as a function of the critical current. As shown, this design allows to obtain a fine control of
the critical current and a consequent reduction of thermal hysteresis.
Finally, it is worth to mention that several experimental studies about the noise properties of
nanoSQUIDs based on nanobridges have been carried out [153, 158-160, 184]. These investigations
included measurements of both white and low frequency magnetic noise as a function of the applied
magnetic field, the temperature and the nanoSQUID design.

70

3.3 NanoSQUID based on sandwich type nanojunctions
As seen in the previous section, the current-voltage characteristics of nanoSQUIDs based on
nanobridges are typically hysteretic, unless be very close to their transition temperature. The
stochastic nature of the switching to the voltage state forbids the use of standard SQUID readout
schemes, compromising the devices sensitivity. Moreover, due to thermal hysteresis, it is difficult to
operate at much lower temperatures that hinder their application to many quantum measurements.
In fact, excessive heat dissipation in the SQUID loop is clearly undesirable for studying samples of
interest in close proximity since they may be directly affected by the heating or indirectly via other
mechanisms that can lead to quantum decoherence. In addition, the reliability and robustness
against the thermal cycles of nano-bridges is poor. In fact, in nanoSQUID based on single niobium
thin film (20-25 nm), a degradation of performance after some thermal cycles can occurs. In
particular, the critical current and its modulation in an external magnetic field decrease.
Furthermore, the critical current values and the modulation depth strongly depend on the thickness
and the size of nano-bridges. However, as seen in the previous section, some of the drawbacks
above reported can be partly overcome by using a further metal layer, which acts as a shunt and a
protection layer.
These motivations have stimulated, in the recent years, the development of nanoSQUIDs based on
niobium sandwich type Josephson nano-junctions (JJs). Obviously, the fabrication of overdamped
JJs, as required for dc-SQUIDs, with submicron dimensions is more challenging with respect the
nanobridge junctions. Compared to Dayem bridge, the main advantages of the nanoSQUIDs based
on JJs are a better control of the critical current, a high modulation depth, an ultra-low noise, being
based on a fully reliable niobium technology. Furthermore, they exhibit a non-hysteretic behaviour,
allowing the flux locked loop operation and the use of more effective readout scheme.
In this framework, Nagel et al. [185] developed nanoSQUIDs in both magnetometer and
gradiometer configurations based on Superconductor/Normal metal/superconductor (SNS) nanojunctions. In particular, they employed niobium JJs with HfTi barrier without resistive shunt [186,
71

187]. The outer loop size of gradiometer was (1.5×1.5) µm2 and the area of the SQUID
magnetometer hole was (500×500) nm2. The area of the junctions was (200×200) nm2 while the
barrier thickness was 24 nm. Fig. 33a and 33b show scanning electron micrographs of the device in
gradiometer and magnetometer configurations; in the inset of Fig. 33b a washer configuration is
shown. At T=4.2 K, the nanodevices did not exhibit hysteresis, the critical current was of 178 µA
whit a modulation depth of about 80%. Comparing with the theory, a βL equal to 0.18 and a
corresponding SQUID inductance of 2.1 pH were estimated. The spectral density of magnetic flux
noise as low as 250 nΦ0/Hz1/2 was measured by using a SQUID amplifier readout (Fig.33c).

Fig. 33 SEM images of the SQUID in a gradiometer (a) and a magnetometer (b) configuration. In
the inset, a washer-type magnetometer is also displayed. The Josephson junctions with HfTi barrier
are indicated in the dotted box. (c) Magnetic flux noise spectral density of SQUID gradiometer
measured at optimal working point indicated by the dashed line in the inset. The latter displays the
voltage as a function of modulation current (solid line) and the magnetic flux spectral density value
in the white region (open circles) (adapted from [185]).
Following the calculation procedure reported in section 2.6 [140], a spin sensitivity of 29 µB/Hz1/2
was obtained for a spin placed directly on the top of the SQUID loop. A few years later, Wolbing et
al. [188] demonstrated that a modified version of this nanoSQUID could operate in a magnetic field
72

up to 0.5 T. In particular, they developed a vertical design where the SQUID loop and the Josephson
junction barrier were in the same plane. With respect to the planar configuration, where the SQUID
loop and the substrate lie in the same plane, this arrangement allows to reduce some spurious
signals arising from the excitation magnetic field.
In the planar configuration, the excitation field for magnetic nano-object characterization is applied
in the plane of the SQUID loop, resulting parallel to the plane of the junction barrier. Since, a JJ is
sensitive to such magnetic field; a subsequent critical current reduction leads to SQUID
performance degradation. Instead, in the case of a vertical configuration, if a fine alignment system
is employed so that the excitation field is merely perpendicular to the SQUID substrate plane, only
the stray fields due to the magnetization response of nano-objects are detected by the nanoSQUID.
The nanoSQUID was based on a Nb thin film microstripline geometry, i.e. the same design
employed for the low inductance superconductive interferometers [31]. The arms of the SQUID
loop, separated by an insulating layer, lie directly on top of each other and are connected via two JJs
(Fig. 34a). In this case, the thickness of bottom and top Nb were 200 and 160 nm respectively while
the Si02 insulation layer was 225 nm thick. This nanoSQUID exhibited a magnetic flux noise less
than 250 nΦ0/Hz1/2 up to a magnetic field of 50 mT applied perpendicularly to the substrate plane
while for a magnetic field of 500 mT, the noise increased to 680 nΦ0/Hz 1/2. Using the same
technology, very recently, Bechstein et al. [189] have developed a family of nanoSQUID
gradiometers in both series and parallel configuration (Fig. 34b and c). They employed JJs with a
size of (200×200) nm2, and HfTi barrier thickness of about 30 nm. The gradiometer loops had an
inner diameter of 840 nm and a line-width of 300 nm. Gradiometer feedback and excitation coils
were also integrated on the same chip of nanoSQUIDs, in order to enable sufficient coupling for
feedback and working point adjusting.

73

Fig 34. a) SEM image of a nanoSQUID designed to operate in moderately high magnetic field. The
Josephson junctions with HfTi barrier are indicated by the (yellow) box, while (cyan) arrows
indicate symmetric and asymmetric current bias (adapted from [188]. b) Pictures of nanoSQUID
series gradiometer and (c) parallel gradiometer (adapted from [189]).
By using an array of 26-SQUID in series and a flux locked loop based readout at room temperature,
a spectral density of white magnetic flux noise as low as 115 nΦ0/Hz1/2 and 200 nΦ0/Hz1/2 were
measured at T=4.2 K for parallel and series configuration, respectively. A readout setup based on
bias reversal scheme [44] in a two-stage configuration was successfully employed to reduce the low
frequency noise. So that, a magnetic flux noise equal to 600 nΦ0/Hz1/2 was achieved at 1 Hz.
Furthermore, the authors demonstrated that the gradiometer design, together with the special design
of the coupling transformer coils, allows obtaining a very low level of nonlinearity.
NanoSQUIDs based on Superconductor/Normal metal-Insulator/Superconductor (SNIS) nanojunctions fabricated using an innovative three-dimensional FIB based nanomachining were
developed by Granata et al. in both planar and vertical configurations [190-193]. The planar
nanoSQUID consisted of a niobium superconducting loop (0.2 µm2) interrupted by two square
nanometric Nb/Al-AlOx/Nb Josephson junctions having an area of (0.3×0.3) µm2. The thickness of
74

both Nb electrodes was 350 nm and the Al was 80 nm thick and the AlOx grown in situ without
breaking the vacuum during the oxidation phase, in pure oxygen. The nanosensors were designed in
both planar and vertical configurations (Fig 35a and b).

Fig. 35 a) SEM images of a Nb-based nanoSQUIDs having both the junctions and hole in a vertical
plane. b) NanoSQUIDs with hole in a planar plane with respect to the junctions. c) Current-voltage
characteristics obtained for different magnetic flux linkages to the planar hole. d) Voltage as a
function of external magnetic flux exhibited by planar nanoSQUID for different bias current values
(adapted from [190] and [192]).
The aspect ratio (ratio between the height and the width) referred to the single lamella is about 2,
resulting in a three-dimensional structure. Even in this case, the I-V characteristics did not exhibit
hysteresis, allowing the device to operate as a magnetic flux to voltage transducer (Fig.35c). A
modulation depth ∆Ic of 110 µA, corresponding to about 70% of the maximum critical current was
measured. The estimated value of βL was 0.55, resulting in a SQUID inductance of 7 pH,

75

compatible with the inductance of the device including the kinetic inductance of the striplines. The
V-Φ characteristics (Fig.35d) were resonance-free allowing the device to work in a wide region of
bias points. This circumstance guarantees good stability during operation in both small signal mode
and in flux-locked-loop configurations. A voltages swing of 80 mV and responsivity value as high
as 2.9 mV/Φ0 for a bias current close to the critical current value was obtained, thanks to high values
of both Rd and modulation depth. The spectral density of the magnetic flux noise was measured in
small signal mode by employing low-noise readout electronics in a direct coupling scheme. In the
white noise region, the nanoSQUID exhibited an intrinsic magnetic flux noise level as low as 680
nΦ0/Hz1/2 corresponding to the spin noise in the loop centre of about 38 µB/Hz1/2 and less than 10
µB/Hz1/2 close to the edges and corners. The main performances of these nanoSQUID as a function
of the temperature have been also investigated and compared with those of SQUIDs with
nanobridges [194].
Ronzani et al [195] developed another kind of nanoSQUID based on SNS JJs. By using standard
EBL, they fabricated a SQUID employing vanadium/copper/vanadium (V/Cu/V) JJs having width
and length of 60 and 370 nm respectively, while the SQUID loop area was 1.5 µm2 (Fig.36a). The
thickness of vanadium and copper were 150 and 20 nm respectively. The I-V characteristics
measured at 240 mK were non-hysteretic, and the Ic-Φ were well fitted by standard SQUID theory
indicating that the current phase relationship is sinusoidal, despite the structure resemble a long
nanobridge. A voltage responsivity of 450 µV/Φ0 was obtained by taking the derivative of the V-Φ
characteristic (Fig.36a). The magnetic flux noise measured by using a direct-coupled amplifier was
2.8 µΦ0/Hz1/2 that enabling to estimate a spin sensitivity of 100 µB/Hz1/2 in the optimal coupling
regime. Repeated cool-down cycles without any appreciable performance degradation
demonstrated the robustness and the reliability of this device. Based on the same V/Cu/V
nanojunctions, the same authors developed also a double loop interferometer [196]. It consists of
the parallel circuit of three Josephson junctions defining two superconducting loops (Fig.36b).

76

Within the experimental error (about 10-2 Ic), such a nanodevice exhibited, at 240 mK, a modulation
depth equal to the whole critical current of the SQUID (Fig. 36b).

Fig. 36 SEM images of superconducting nanodevices based on V/Cu/V Josephson junctions. a)
NanoSQUID image with a superimposed measurement setup scheme. The inset displays a
magnified view of the weak links. The voltage-magnetic flux characteristics, measured at 240 mK,
for different values of bias current is shown in the middle figure while the influence of the
temperature on the maximum responsivity (VΦ) is reported in figure on the right (adapted from
[195]). b) Picture of double-loop superconducting interferometer. The figure reports also the
measurement setup as overlapped draft and a scheme of working principle (top left). The lower
inset depicts the top view of the metallic nanowire. At centre, the I-Φ curves measured at different
temperatures are shown. Finally, the detailed view of minimum values of normalized critical
current are shown (adapted from [196]).
77

Very recently, M. Schmelz et al. [197] have developed an ultra low noise nanoSQUID based on
standard superconductor/insulator/superconductor (SIS) Josephson junctions. The SIS junction
based SQUIDs offer a higher voltage swing resulting in a better performance than comparable to
SNS or SNIS junctions. They employed a technology based on sub-micron cross-type Nb/AlOx/Nb
fabrication [198]. The nanoSQUID depicted in the Fig. 37a consists of a narrow Nb/AlOx/Nb
trilayer strip and a Nb wiring layer having an u-shape. The square Josephson junctions, having a
size of (0.8×0.8) µm2, are formed by the overlap between the trilayer and the Nb wiring. The inner
SQUID loop dimensions ranges from 0.5 to 10 µm. At T=4.2 K, these nanoSQUIDs exhibited a
voltage amplitude of about 300 µV and, consequently, very high voltage responsivity. The
magnetic flux noise of the smallest nanoSQUID (loop area of 0.25 µm2), measured by using a
SQUID series amplifier, was as low as 66 nΦ0/Hz1/2. The estimated value of corresponding
magnetic moment sensitivity was 7µB/Hz1/2, for a magnetic dipole lying at the centre of the square
loop.

Fig. 37 a) SEM image of all niobium based nanoSQUID with cross-type Josephson junctions
pointed out by the dotted boxes. b) Flux noise spectral densities obtained with different
responsivity. On the right axis, the corresponding spin sensitivity is reported (adapted from [197]).
NanoSQUIDs based on superconducting aluminium tunnel junction were developed by Isciguro et
al. [199]. The hole of nanoSQUID was (0.5×0.5) µm2 while the junction size was about (0.1×0.1)
µm2. At T=75 mK, the I-V characteristic showed an hysteretic behaviour with a critical current
78

lower than 1 µA. Despite the critical current modulation depth reached the 80% of Ic, the resulting
flux to current transfer factor was small (less than 1 µA/Φ0) leading to a poor a magnetic flux
sensitivity.
3.4 NanoSQUIDs for scanning microscopy: nanoscale 3D pick-up loop, nanoSQUID on a tip.
As will be shown in the next section, one of the key points is how to bring or integrate the nanosample of interest in close proximity to the SQUID, in order to achieve an enough magnetic
coupling to detect single spin or small spin populations. A different approach could be the
development of SQUID for scanning magnetic microscopy (section 1.5) with an ultra high spatial
resolution. Recent improvements of the spatial resolution includes the terraced scanning SQUID
susceptometer with submicron pickup loops [200], the STM-SQUID which combine the scanning
tunnel microscope with a SQUID [201], the thin-film microsusceptometer with integrated nanoloop
[202].
Thereafter, we will describe two peculiar nanodevices, developed following the aforementioned
intent. Romans et al. [203] fabricated a niobium SQUID with a freestanding nano pick-up loop
made of tungsten. In such a way, it is possible to fabricate three-dimensional pick-up loop enabling
the measurements of all spatial components of the magnetic field. Moreover, the nano pick-up loop
can be specially engineered and deposited around the sample to investigate. The 3D pick-up loop
fabrication was based on the FIB induced growth of metallic nanowire [204]. The nanodevice
consists of a freestanding tungsten pick-up loop with an area of 1.6 µm2, connected to a single turn
input coil via a planar striplines having a length and a width of 9 µm and 0.5 µm respectively
(Fig.38). In order to reduce the parasitic flux capture area between the two nanostrips, these are
coated by an insulating material and a superconducting shielding layer.
The input loop was magnetically coupled to a Nb microSQUID (area of 1.6 µm2) including two 70
nm-wide Dayem nanobridges. Two parallel tungsten control lines, carrying equal and opposite
currents, were integrated on the same chip and located close to the 3D pick-up loop (Fig.38).

79

Fig. 38 a) Scanning electron micrograph of a 3D tungsten pickup loop arranged perpendicularly to
the SQUID plane and a sketch of full three-dimensional device. b) The total amount of magnetic
flux induced into the SQUID by control current as a function of temperature. The (red) dashed line
shows the theoretical prediction (adapted from [203]).
Since the magnetic field generated by the control lines decays rapidly, these were used to
demonstrate the effectiveness of the device to detect the localized source. In particular, the authors
measured the magnetic flux due to control lines as function of the temperature noting an abrupt
signal variation in correspondence of the tungsten critical temperature (about 5.4 K) (Fig. 38c).
Finkler et al. and Vasyukov et al. [205-207] have developed an innovative technique for the
realization of a nanoSQUID for ultra high sensitivity magnetic scanning microscopy. They
fabricated a nanoSQUID on the apex of a sharp quartz tip obtaining magnetic moment sensitivity as
low as 0.38 µB/Hz1/2. The nanoSQUIDs, made of three different superconducting materials (Al
[205,206], Nb [207], and Pb [207]) were realized on pipettes with tip diameters in the range of 40300 nm. The tips were obtained by pulling a 1 mm of quartz tube by a suitable puller instrument.
The fig. 39 a-c depicts the Al, Nb, and Pb nanoSQUIDs with three different loop diameters. The
fabrication procedure was based on three self-alignment steps. In the first one, the superconducting
thin film was deposited onto the apex ring of the pipette. Such step forms the superconducting loop
of the SQUID. After that, the pipette was tilted at an angle of about 100° with respect to the axis of
the deposition source and a second superconducting film was deposited forming a first lead. Then

80

the pipette was rotated at an angle of about –100°, followed by a third deposition on the other side
to form the second lead. The short parts of the ring corresponding to the gaps between the leads act
as two Dayem-bridges, while the two areas where the leads contact the ring form superconducting
regions (Fig.39 a-c). The thickness of superconducting film depends on the materials. In particular,
for the different nanoSQUIDs, the thicknesses of the leads and superconducting loop were
respectively: 25 nm and 17 nm in the case of Al, 35 nm and 23 nm for Nb and, at last, 25 nm and 15
nm for the Pb.

Fig. 39 SEM images of nanoSQUIDs built on a quartz tip as schematized in the top left corner. a),
b), and c) Pictures of Nb based, Pb based and Al based nanoSQUID respectively. d) Magnetic flux
noise spectral densities exhibited by Nb and Pb nanoSQUIDs. e) Spectral densities of spin noise for
Pb based nanoSQUIDs at different applied magnetic field (adapted from [205] and [207]).
The Nb and Pb nanodevice were characterized at T=4.2 K whereas the Al device at T=300 mK. All
devices showed a non-hysteretic I-V characteristics and a critical current modulation depth of about
81

25%, 50%, and 80% for Nb, Al and Pb based devices respectively. Such discrepancies of critical
current modulation depth can be ascribed to different ratio between the bridge length and the
superconducting coherence length. It was confirmed by the triangular shape of the I-Φ patterns in
the case of Nb nanoSQUID that exhibited the lowest modulation depth. The magnetic flux noise
spectra of Nb and Pb nanoSQUIDs for different loop diameters and different magnetic field
expositions are reported in the Fig. 39d and 39e respectively. The Pb nanoSQUIDs exhibited a
magnetic flux noise as low as 50 nΦ0/Hz1/2, which is one of the best values achieved. The magnetic
moment sensitivity obtained by assuming a Bohr magneton in the centre of the loop was 0.38
µB/Hz1/2. It is worth to point out that the spin sensitivity still remain below 1 µB/Hz1/2 for magnetic
field as high as 1 T as shown on Fig.39e, ensuring an ultra high magnetic moment sensitivity for all
nanomagnetism measurements.
3.5 High critical temperature superconductor based nanoSQUIDs
Different high critical temperature (HTc) Josephson junctions have been extensively investigated,
including bi-crystal, bi-epitaxial, step-edge, and superconductor–normal–superconductor (SNS)
type [32]. High-Tc SQUID magnetometers are mostly fabricated on bicrystal, ramp edge and step
edge substrates [33]. However, it is not easy to fabricate nanojunctions and nanoSQUIDs by using
these methods. On the other hand, nanoSQUIDs made of HTc superconductors might extend the
operational working temperature (from mK to above 77 K) and the application of very strong
magnetic fields (order of few T).
Wu et al. [208] fabricated the first HTs nanoSQUID based on nanobridge YBa2Cu3O (YBCO)
junctions (Fig.40). The nanoSQUIDs, fabricated by using a FIB technique, had a minimum flux
capture area of (250×250) nm2 and nanobridge sizes of 100 nm (width) and 250 nm (length). The
nanoSQUIDs were fabricated on SrTiO3 (STO) substrate and were patterned on an YBCO/Au
bilayer having a thickness of 150/300 nm respectively.

82

Fig. 40 Picture of a high-Tc NanoSQUID based on YBa2Cu3O7 −x nanobridges. a, b) Images of the
device by different view angle (adapted from [208]).
As usual, the Au layer acts as both fabrication mask for FIB etching and protective layer. The I-V
characteristic showed a non-hysteretic behaviour and a strong flux flow at temperature below 76 K.
These nanoSQUIDs exhibited low values of critical current and normal resistance (IcRn=5 µV)
resulting in very low amplitudes of the V-Φ characteristic (few µV) and consequently in a poor
magnetic flux sensitivity.
Schwartz et al [209] developed a HTc nanoSQUID based on grain boundary Josephson junction
demonstrating low noise performance up to B=1 T applied parallel to the plane of the SQUID. The
fabrication was based on the deposition of a bilayer YBCO/Au (50/60 nm thick) on a SrTiO3 bycrystal substrate patterned by a FIB technique [140]. The Figs. 41a and 41b show the nanoSQUID
with a hole size of (300×400) nm2 and junctions having a width of 130 nm and a length of 400 nm.
In order to effectively flux modulate the SQUID, a 90 nm wide nano-constriction was included.
The authors reported a fully characterization at T=4.2 K for applied magnetic field up to B=3 T.
Due to a high normal resistance, a high IcRn (130 µV) value was obtained. For B=0 T, a critical
current modulation depth of more than 50% of Ic and a voltage responsivity of 500 µV/Φ0 were
measured from the I-Φ and V-Φ curves, respectively. For B=1 T, the characteristics remained

83

almost the same. However, due to a slight decrease of the critical current, the V-Φ became more
smooth leading to a decrease of the voltage responsivity.

Fig. 41 a) SEM image of the YBCO based nanoSQUID with a grain boundary Josephson junctions.
b) Magnified view of the nanoSQUID to point out the hole and junctions. c) Flux noise spectral
density of the device at zero (black) and non-zero (red) applied field (adapted from [209]).
In the white region of the magnetic flux noise spectra (Fig. 41c) a noise level of 1.3 and 2.3
µΦ0/Hz1/2 for B= 0 T and B=1 T respectively was measured. As expected, in both case, the flux
noise increases at frequencies below 3 kHz. In fact, unlike LTc SQUID, the low frequency noise
corner in the HTc SQUID is much higher (several kHz). However, at B=1 T, an additional low
frequency noise due to the fluctuating Abrikosov vortices can be observed. The spin sensitivity was
evaluated by following the method reported in [140] and summarized in the section 2.5. Assuming
that the magnetic nano-object is placed on the top of nano-constriction at a distance of 10 nm, they
found a spin sensitivity of 62 and 110 µB/Hz1/2 for B=0 and B=1 T respectively. Very recently, the
same group has employed a similar YBCO nanoSQUID exibiting a very low white noise
(SΦ1/2=230 nΦ0/Hz1/2 in FLL at T=4.2 K) to peform interesting measurements of nanomagnetism
(see section 4.2).
A HTc nanoSQUID based on Dayem nanobridges and able to operate in the full temperature range
below the transition temperature was developed by Arpaia et al. [210]. The fabrication process was
based on the pulsed laser deposition of YBCO 50 nm thick on a MgO substrate and patterned by
EBL. The nanobridges had a width of 50 nm and a length in the range 100-200 nm, while the

84

nanoSQUID loops range from 100 to 1000 nm. The Fig.42 shows a nanoSQUID with a loop size of
(200×150) nm2.

Fig. 42 a) Atomic force micrograph of a Dayem bridge based high-Tc nanoSQUID coated with an
Au layer. b) Critical current as a function of the applied magnetic field measured at T = 300 mK
and close to the critical temperature (80 K) (adapted from [210]).
The I-Φ curves for T=300 mK and 80 K exhibited enough critical current modulation depth in both
case confirming the capability of these nanosensor to work in a wide range of temperature. The
authors obtained a convincing fit of current modulation depth by using an approximated expression
of the CPR obtained from equation 31 [122]. In particular, they found that ∆Ic/Ic=1/βL, which is
standard relationship of a SQUID with high βL (section 1.2). Also in this case the inductance of
nanoSQUID (L≈15 pH) coincided with the kinetic inductance of the nanobridges. The intrinsic
white magnetic flux noise measured above 10 kHz was of 0.7 µΦ0/Hz1/2 and corresponds to a spin
sensitivity of about 50 µB/Hz1/2. At frequencies below 10 kHz, the noise was dominated by 1/f noise
probably due to critical current fluctuations.
3.6 Other nanoSQUID types
In many cases, the development of nanoSQUIDs provides new insights on both the Josephson
coupling between the superconducting electrodes and the electronic transport properties of

85

materials. In this section, we will shortly describe some nanoSQUIDs that, beyond technology and
applications, are powerful probes of underlying physics of new material and tunnelling.
A very attractive nano-device is the nanoSQUID based on single-walled carbon nanotube (CNT)
Josephson junctions developed by Cleuziou et al. [211,212]. The device, having an area of about 1
µm2 consists of a superconducting loop formed by an Al structure closed by two CNT Josephson
junctions [213] with a diameter of about 1 nm and a length of 200 nm. The fabrication procedure
was based on the location of CNT by atomic force microscope technique followed by aligned
electron beam lithography to pattern the SQUID loop and contacts. A palladium layer (3 nm thick)
was used as a buffer layer to provide high transparency contacts to carbon nanotubes, while 50 nm
thick Al was employed as superconducting electrodes. The CNT nanoSQUIDs reported in Fig.43a
shows fork geometry for the loop allowing to fabricate both junctions from the same nanotube. The
two lateral gates were used to tune independently the electronic properties of each CNT junction
while the back-gate adjusts the transparency of the CNT contact barrier. The critical currents of
each junction can be tuned independently with gate voltage (Fig.43 b-e).

Fig. 43 a) Atomic force microscopy image of the nanoSQUID built by Cleuziou and co-workers.
The carbon nanotube (CNT) indicated in the figure by an arrow acts as Josephson junctions. b) and
c) Current-voltage and critical current-magnetic flux characteristics measured at about 35 mK for

86

CNT tuned on resonance. d) and e) The same characteristics for both junctions tuned off resonance.
Note that, there is a difference of almost two orders of magnitude between the two cases (adapted
from [211]).
In fact, since the electronic wave-functions in the nanotube are confined by the insulating contacts
with the superconductors, the CNT junctions acts as a quantum dots with well-separated energy
levels and can be tuned by voltage gate. When the energy level is adjusted to the superconductor
Fermi energy, the CNTs are tuned on-resonance and a supercurrent flows troughs the junctions (Fig.
43b and 43c). On the other side, if the CNTs are tuned off-resonance, the critical current is much
smaller (Fig. 43d and 43e). Moreover, the authors showed that it is possible to switch to a negative
Josephson tunnelling by varying the back-gate voltage. In other words, the device allows to switch
from 0-junction to π-junction by a gate control, making it very appealing also for quantum bit
realization where π-junctions seem to exhibit a long decoherence time. In view of applications, a
great advantage of this nanodevice is the possibility to achieve high magnetic coupling by placing
the single molecule just on the nanotube. In fact, their comparable cross section of about 1nm2
allows the SQUID loop to collect up to the half amount of the magnetic field produced by the single
nanoparticle. Furthermore, it is possible to tune the coupling between the sample and the sensor, by
switching on and off the critical current via the lateral gate control.
Another example of superconducting quantum device acting as a “self-probe” to investigate the
innovative material is the SQUID based on graphene junctions [214]. The possibility to realize a
Josephson junction based on a graphene barrier was investigated in previous works [215,216]. Such
a SQUID can be used as a tool to investigate the CPR of graphene Josephson junctions, transport
mechanisms and the scattering length in graphene single layer. Due to “relativistic” band structure
of the graphene [217], the investigations of electrical properties are very interesting and useful to
understand the underlying physic of this material. In addition, if employed as a magnetic sensor, the
carbon surface facilitates the chemical attachment of nano-magnets. The SQUID reported in [214]
consists of Al/Pd rectangular loop interrupted by a single graphene sheet having a width of 4 µm
87

(Fig.43a). The distance between the Al/Pd electrodes (50 nm) sets the length of the junctions. The
thickness of Al and Pd films were 50 and 3 nm respectively. The Pd thin film ensures a low contact
resistance to the graphene sheet. Characterized at T=20 mK, the device exhibited a critical current
of about 10 µA and a critical current modulation depth more than 90% of Ic, indicating a slight
deviation of the CPR from the sinusoidal shape.
In the framework of development of micro and nanoSQUIDs operating at high magnetic fields,
Mandal et al. developed a SQUID based on diamond [218]. This material when doped with boron
above a critical level (0.25 atom %) shows superconducting properties with very high critical field
[219,220]. The diamond SQUID, was formed by a (2.5×2.5) µm2 loop including two nanobridges
having a wide of 100 nm and a length of 250 nm (Fig. 44b). The fabrication procedure was based on
the fabrication of a boron doped diamond film (300 nm thick) by microwave plasma-enhanced
chemical vapour deposition. The films were patterned by EBL technique and oxygen plasma
etching. Even if the critical temperature of the diamond superconductor film was about 3 K, the
device was tested at 400 mK or at 40 mK for high magnetic field measurements. The I-V
characteristics were hysteretic and the critical current modulation depths were about 15% of Ic. The
magnetic flux noise estimated by the current switching distribution (equation 18) was 50 µΦ0/Hz1/2.
The characterization reported by the authors for perpendicular applied magnetic field in the range
0.2-4 T, showed that the critical current decreases and the I-V characteristics became non-hysteretic
(for B>200 mT) allowing to measure also the V-Φ characteristics. Voltage oscillations in the full
range of applied magnetic field were observed, but their amplitudes were lower than 1 µV giving a
poor magnetic flux sensitivity if the device is employed as a voltage transducer.
Following the same fabrication procedure of Cleuzou et al. for the CNT SQUID, Spathis et al [221]
developed another interesting nanodevice based on indium arsenide (InAs) nanowires and fabricated
by EBL technique. The SQUID consisted of a vanadium-superconducting loop including two InAs
weak links obtained by a single nanowire contacted by vanadium electrodes (Fig.44c).

88

Fig. 44 SEM images of microSQUIDs based on: a) Josephson nano-junctions with graphene
barrier; b) boron-doped diamond; c) InAs nanowires; d) MgB2 nanobridges (adapted from [214],
[218], [221], and [226] respectively).
The SQUID loop had a geometrical area of 12 µm2, whereas the two nanowires had a diameter of
90 nm and a length ranging between 20 nm-50 nm. The devices were characterized at 244 mK. The
critical current ranged from 150 nA to 350 nA and the I-V characteristics showed no hysteresis up to
a critical current of 250 nA. It can be ascribed to a heating effect occurring when the device switch
in the resistive branch. Despite the low critical current, due to high normal resistance (200-300 Ω),
the product IcRn was about 100 µV. The critical current modulation depths were as high as 95% of
Ic indicating a sinusoidal CPR. However, both the voltage swing and voltage responsivity were
lower than 10 µV and 50 µV/Φ0 respectively, leading to a magnetic flux noise greater than 25

µΦ0/Hz1/2 if operating with a standard read-out electronics. Since the spin-orbit of InAs nanowire is
strong, these device are very attractive for the investigation of the Majorana fermions [222].
At beginning of the new century (2001), a new type of superconductor was discovered, that is the
MgB2 [223]. In view of applications, the main advantage is the relative long coherence length that
weakens the grain boundary effect leading to a large critical current density. Moreover, as seen, the
fabrication of SQUID based on nanobridges benefits by long coherence length. Therefore, since its
89

discovery, several SQUID sensors based on MgB2 have been developed [224,225]. Micro-sized
MgB2 SQUIDs based on nanobridges (100 nm in width) with a loop area of about 10 µm2 have been
fabricated by using a FIB technique [226,227] (Fig.44d). The I-V characteristics were nonhysterestic in the full range of explored temperature [4.2 K-33 K]. The V-Φ characteristics showed
a sinusoidal like behaviour and high amplitudes (30 µV at T=33.5 K, 80 µV at T=15.2 K, and 130

µV at T=5.9 K). Unfortunately, magnetic flux noise measurement were not reported.
4. NanoSQUID applications
In this section, we will report the measurements techniques and the main applications of
nanoSQUIDs. They include the nanomagnetism, the ultra high spatial resolution scanning
microscopy, the nanoscale electromechanical system resonator, single photon detection,
nanoelectronics and quantum computing.
4.1 Measurements methods
4.1.1 Switching current measurements and cold mode
As seen in the previous sections, in many cases the nanoSQUIDs show a hysteretic I-V
characteristic preventing the use of standard readout electronics based on the low noise voltage
amplifier and the FLL circuitry to increase the linear dynamical range. However, as reported in the
section 1.3, in the case of hysteretic I-V, the sensor can be used as magnetic flux to current
transducer. In this mode, the switching currents are measured to obtain magnetic flux by dividing
the critical current variation by a suitable transfer factor. This method has been extensively
employed in many experiments [23, 106-107, 172-176]. Due to the thermal and quantum
fluctuations, the critical current is a stochastic variable, and so it is affected by an intrinsic
uncertainty. In order to measure effectively the switching current, a time of flight technique is
typically used [228, 229]. For this aim, the SQUID is current biased with a triangular-shaped
waveform at frequencies ranging from 100 Hz up to 10 kHz. The synchronism of the ramp generator
is delayed and sent to start input of a time-to-amplitude converter (TAC). The device voltage is sent
to a discriminator that provides the stop signal for the TAC at the time of the switching out of the
90

zero voltage state. The TAC generates a voltage signal proportional to the time elapsed between the
start and the stop inputs that is sent to an analog to digital converter. In this way, a count is assigned
to the channel corresponding to the switching time. Several thousands events are to be recorded in
order to get a suitable experimental histograms of the switching current. The Ic measurement, for
each exciting magnetic field value, is obtained by averaging the switching current values. In such a
way it is possible to measure the switching current with an uncertain of about 1 part in 104, resulting
in an overall noise of the order of 10-4 Φ0 [174-176] or a spectral density of magnetic noise of 10
µΦ0/Hz1/2 [23]. A drawback of the averaging is the reduced bandwidth of the measurement set-up
making this measurement technique suitables for slow or quasi-stationary signals.
It is well know that the Joule heating, occurring when the SQUID or a Josephson junction switch in
the resistive state, can be a limiting factor for several experiments requiring an extremely low
temperature (mK range) or a very low dissipation level such as macroscopic quantum tunnelling
(MQT) investigations. In order to study the temperature dependence of the magnetization reversal
and the MQT of magnetization, a suitable measurement technique called cold mode technique was
developed [23, 106, 230]. The nanoSQUID is biased with a constant current close to the critical
value while an orthogonal magnetic field provides a magnetic flux bias in a high responsivity point
of the I-Φ characteristic. When the magnetization reversal of the particle occurs, the magnetic flux
trough the SQUID causes the transition to the resistive state. Since the pulse voltage can be
measured few nanoseconds after the magnetization reversal, a very precise switching field
measurements can be performed. The nanoparticle is heated only after the reversal of magnetization
(cold mode). As concern as the MQT of magnetization [231] the advantage of this method lies in
the weak coupling between the nano-object under investigation and the nanoSQUID acting as a
readout system. However, it worth to point out that the cold mode allows to measure only the
switching field of magnetization reversal and not the magnetization before and during the
magnetization reversal.

91

4.1.2 Feedback mode for increase the linear dynamic range
Due to non linearity of SQUID transfer function (I-Φ), the above mentioned method fails in the
case of magnetic flux variation larger than Φ0/2. It occurs when a strong magnetic signal arises
from nano-objects or when a high excitation magnetic field is required as in the magnetization
curve measurements. In any case, data treatment is needed to extend the linear range of the SQUID
output. To this aim, suitable feedback circuits have been implemented [23, 170, 174, 232]. The
basic scheme, reported in the Fig. 45, features the standard flux locked loop mechanism. The
variation of nanoparticles magnetization induces a change of the magnetic flux into the SQUID
loop, which results in a variation of the SQUID mean critical current ∆Ic. This value is used to
calculate the feedback current ∆IF to send into an integrated coil producing a counter magnetic flux
into the nanoSQUID in order to keep the switching current constant at a working point. So, as in the
standard FLL, the flux bias point is locked and the variation of the magnetic flux is given by
∆Φ=∆IF//IΦF; where IΦ,F is the feedback coil sensitivity IΦ,F=∂IF/∂Φ, that is the feedback current
required to induce one flux quantum in the SQUID. It can be easily evaluated by sending a current
in the feedback coil and measuring the corresponding flux quanta coupled in the SQUID loop. This
procedure is reiterated for each excitation field value and a customized data analysis program sums
the measured magnetic flux variations. A solenoid coil can be used to provide a uniform exciting
magnetic field Bex in the plane of the nano-sensor. However, a small misalignment between the
excitation magnetic field and chip surface is unavoidable and it is responsible for a parasitic
magnetic flux threading the SQUID loop, proportional to the excitation magnetic field. Since, the
exciting magnetic field can be very high (up to few T), the residual normal component may be
greater than the signal arising from the magnetic nanoparticles and, therefore, its contribution to the
magnetic flux has to be suitably subtracted. To this aim, a nanoSQUID without MNP acting as a
reference can be integrated on the same chip to measure the parasitic magnetic flux Φp=Bp AS to be
subtract (AS is the effective nanoSQUID area and Bp the normal component of the exciting magnetic

92

field) [132]. Since Bp=Bex sin(α), the misalignment angle α can be evaluated by α=arcsin (ΦP/(AS⋅
Bex)).

Fig. 45 A Scheme of the experimental set-up to increase the dynamical linear range of a hysteretic
nanoSQUID during the nanoparticle magnetization measurements. In order to reduce the
stochastic noise, the variation of the critical current can be obtained by averaging the switching
current events measured by using a time of flight technique [174-176].
As alternative, a fine alignment system based on a 3D vector magnet can be used [170]. Such a
system allows a precise alignment of the magnetic field in the SQUID plane by combining field
generated along the three axis of magnet (B=Bxi+Byj+Bzk).
4.1.3 Attachment and manipulation of magnetic nano-objects on a nanoSQUID
The positioning of the magnetic nano-object on a SQUID is an important issue. In fact, as seen in
the previous sections the SQUID response depends on the position of the sample within the loop. In
particular, the highest magnetic coupling is obtained for sample positioned directly on the
nanobridge or the loop edges.

93

Several techniques are used to place the nano-objects on the SQUIDs. The simplest technique
consists in depositing onto nanoSQUID chip a single drop of a solution containing the magnetic
nanoparticles (MNPs) dispersed in a solvent. The drop is left to dry leaving the nanoparticles stuck
on the chip due to Van der Waals force [23, 174-176, 232]. If a suitable pipette is used, it is possible
deposit a drop of about 1 µl corresponding to about 1 pg. The position of the nanoparticles respect
to the SQUID loop can be verified by scanning electron microscopy. As expected, in this case, the
distribution of the MNPs is random and it is not possible to put one or some MNPs in a desiderate
position. Therefore, after the magnetization measurements, the position and size of the
nanoparticles are determined by scanning electron microscopy.

Fig. 46 a) Image of a nanoSQUID with a FePt nanobead positioned by SEM technique (adapted
from [235]). b) Metallic aerosol particles positioned onto nanobridges by AFM technique (adapted
from [23]). c) Sketch of a nanoSQUID with nanoparticles embedded within his body [107]. d) AFM
image of a nanoSQUID showing ferritin nanoparticles (indicated by the arrows) located onto
nanobridges by using a self-assembly monolayer and EBL (adapted from [242]).
Another simple method to deposit MNPs on the sensitive area of the nanoSQUID is the electrospray
or spray technique [23], which has already successfully used to produce quantum dots and
94

nanoparticles and to deposit thin film of biological, organic and inorganic materials. This method
could be particularly suitable for nanoSQUID based on carbon nanotubes. In addition, the chemical
functionalization of the carbon nanotube and the controlled attaching of molecules with adapted
ligand [234] could be another effective possibility for this hybrid nanodevice.
Accurate and reversible MNPs positioning method are obtained by using SEM [235,236] or AFM
[237-239]. In the SEM case, a micromanipulator brings a sharpened carbon fibre probe close to
single nano-object (nanobead or nanoparticle). In order to weld the tip to the nano-object, a burst
from the electron beam deposits amorphous carbon acting as ligand. After that, the probe reaches
the desiderata position (loop edge), the nanosample is attached to the nanoSUID surface by using
another brief electron beam exposure and the tip is withdrawn. It is worth noting that this method is
reversible, that is, after the measurement the nano-object can be removed or located in another place
by using the same procedure. In addition, the use of thin carbon fibre tips is better than more
traditional electrochemically sharpened metal tips, and provides an excellent way to protect the
SQUID loop and particle, as the tips are very flexible. The Fig. 46a shows a nanoSQUID with a
single FePt particle bead positioned close to the edge..
Nanoparticles can be manipulated and arranged in a very effective way also by using the AFM, in
which the tip is used as tool to push particles along smooth substrates. Unlike the SEM, the AFM
can be also used in the non-contact mode both for locating and moving nanoparticles. The
advantage of this method is the possibility of seeing the nano-object moving in real time. In
addition, the apex wear and the tip degradation due to particle sticking are avoided [238, 239]. In
the Fig.46b, a picture of a micro-SQUID with metallic aereosol nanoparticles manipulated by using
an AFM is reported.
Another effective method consists in embedding the MNPs directly in the nanobridge
[107,240,241]. In particular, the cluster of nanoparticles are simultaneously deposited together with
niobium film in ultra high vacuum condition, so that the MNPs are buried in the superconducting
film (Fig.46c). This method improves the magnetic flux coupling and protect the MNPs against the
95

oxidation. It has been successfully employed to perform magnetic measurements on cobalt and iron
nano-cluster containing up to 1000 atoms [240, 241]. In these experiments the cobalt and iron
cluster were produced by a laser vaporization and inert gas condensation while a 15-20 nm thick Nb
film was deposited by electron gun evaporator. Afterwards, an EBL provided the pattern of both
loop and nanobridge junctions. Since the SQUID loops had micrometric size, only the clusters
embedded in the nanobridge produced an appreciable magnetic signal.
An original method to attach MNPs on a nanoSQUID was developed by Lam et al [242]. They
developed a technique for attaching ferritin-based nanoparticles on the SQUID using self-assembly
monolayers and electron beam lithography. The self-assembly monolayers are monomolecular
layers which are spontaneously formed after a suitable chemical procedure. They act as linker
molecules allowing the binding between the nanoSQUID surface and the ferritin nanoparticles. In
particular, to attach ferritin molecules to the Au thin film coating the niobium SQUID, a selfassembled monolayer of sulphur-terminated linker molecules was used. Before the nanoparticle
attachment, the nanoSQUID was covered with a PMMA layer and an EBL pattern was performed in
order to open nanometric windows (200×200 nm2) on the top of the nanobridges. In such a way, a
local attachment of the linker molecules and ferritins in the uncovered area was obtained (Fig.46d).
4.2 Nanomagnetism applications
The main application of nanoSQUID is in nanomagnetism, which is the study of small magnetic
systems including: nanoparticles, nanobeads, nanotube, nanocluster etc. The interest for this branch
of condensed physics goes back to the end of 1940s, when the pioneering works of Neel [243],
hypothesized the measurement of the magnetic properties of the individual nanoparticle. Recently,
there is a growing interest for magnetic nanoparticle applications in biology and nanomedicine, as
well as for the study of underlying physics. In particular, the measurements of magnetic relaxation
process is very useful for both basic physics investigations like the measurements of the anisotropy
constant [244], quantum tunnelling of magnetization [107] and for drug delivery applications or
immunoassay techniques [245]. Among the several techniques tools employed to investigate the
96

magnetic nano-objects [14-21], those based on nanoSQUIDs allow the most detailed and precise
study of magnetic objects at nanometric scale. In fact, as above mentioned, nanoSQUIDs exhibit an
ultra high magnetic moment sensitivity, approaching to the single Bohr magnetons per unit of
bandwidth.
In this section, we will address the main nanomagnetism measurements, performed by using micro
and nanoSQUIDs. We will start with some of the pioneering works carried out by the group of
Institut Nèel in Grenoble which successfully employed Nb micro-sized SQUIDs (0.5-2.0 µm in
diameter) based on nanobridges to perform very interesting and useful nanomagnetism
investigations. Many of their experiments were focused on the investigation of the magnetization
reversal of magnetic nanoparticles (that is the reversal of its magnetic moment), which is of great
relevance for applications in spintronic and basic physics. In the case of a single-domain
nanoparticle, the model of uniform rotation of the magnetization (Stoner–Wohlfarth model) can
describe the magnetization reversal [246]. The basic assumption of this model can be summarized
as follow. In a particle of an ideal magnetic material, the exchange energy holds all spins tightly
parallel to each other. In this case, the exchange energy is constant and it plays no role in the energy
minimization. Hence, there is competition only between the anisotropy energy of the particle and
the effect of the applied field. In the framework of this model, the potential energy of a particle is
given by:
E = K V sin 2 φ − µ 0 M s V H cos (φ − θ )

(42)

Where KV is the uniaxial anisotropy energy which depends on the shape of the particle, V is its
volume, MS is the spontaneous magnetization and H the magnitude of the applied field; finally, φ
and θ are the angles of the magnetization and the applied field respectively, with respect to the easy
axis of magnetization. The energy potential has two wells corresponding to the two stable
orientations of the magnetization (Fig. 47a). For given values of θ and H, the magnetization is
oriented along an angle φ that locally minimizes the energy. When a magnetic field is applied, the
height of the energy barrier decreases and one of the two wells can become metastable. The
97

magnetization reversal is defined by the minimal field value at which the energy barrier between the
metastable minimum and the stable one vanishes. This process is analogue to the supercurrent
decay in a Josephson junction or the decay from the metastable flux statesin a rf SQUID; also in
these cases, there is multi or double well potential and the escape process occurs when the bias
current or the bias magnetic flux reaches the critical values [228, 247, 248]. Therefore, the
magnetization reversal in a nanoparticle is a stochastic process characterized by thermal and
quantum fluctuations. If the thermal energy is low enough (low temperature), the quantum tunnel
through the potential barrier can occur as in the Josephson devices.

Fig. 47 a) Schematic draw of the potential energy of a magnetic nanoparticle as a function of the
magnetization angle. The potential energy has two wells corresponding to two stable orientations of
the magnetization. b) Field dependence of the switching field (Stoner–Wohlfarth astroid). The
magnetization switches from the metastable well to the stable one when the applied field crosses the
Stoner–Wohlfarth astroid.
The curve relative to switching field as a function of the direction of the applied field (Fig. 47b) is
called the Stoner–Wohlfarth astroid and provides information about the stability of the nanoparticle
magnetization. This topic is exhaustively described in a Werndorfer’s review article [107].
The first magnetization measurements of individual single-domain nanoparticles, at very low
temperatures, by using a SQUID were presented by Wernsdorfer et al. [249]. They used a Nb
98

micro-bridge dc-SQUID fabricated by EBL while the nanoparticles (Co, Ni, TbFe3, and
Co81Zr9Mo8Ni2) were fabricated by sputtered thin films and defined by either ion beam etching or
lift-off technique. The nanoparticle clusters were deposited on the SQUID loop using a PMMA
mask. The external field was applied in the plane of the SQUID, thus only the flux induced
by the stray field of the sample magnetization was detected. They measured, at T=0.2 K, both
hysteresis loop and switching magnetic field by using the SQUID as magnetic flux to current
converter and as a switching detector respectively. In the Fig. 48a, typical hysteresis loops for Co,
Ni and Co81Zr9Mo8Ni2 particles with dimension of either (200×100) nm2 or (100×50) nm2 and
thickness between 8 and 30 nm are reported.

Fig. 48 a) Hysteresis loops relative to different nanoparticles, measured by a microSQUID at
T=0.2 K. b) Variation of the mean switching field versus temperature for both Ni and Co
nanoparticles (adapted from [249]).
The magnetization reversal takes less than 100 µs and its behaviour is close to the magnetization of
a single domain particle described by the Stoner–Wohlfarth model. The variation of the mean
switching field Hc, of Ni and Co nanoparticles as a function of temperature is shown in Fig.48b. The
vertical bars indicate the width of the switching field distribution.
Soon after, magnetization measurements with a sensitivity of about 104 µB were performed,
allowing the first studies of magnetization reversal of a small number of crystalline singledomain Co clusters of 2-5 nm in diameter [250].
99

Later, the magnetization measurements of isolated Ni nanowires, with a diameter ranging from 40
and 100 nm, and of individual ferromagnetic nanoparticles (ellipsoidal Co particles with a diameter
of 25 nm) were successfully performed [251,252] at temperature between 0.2 and 6.0 K.

Fig. 49 a) SEM images of microSQUID with a Ni nanowire having a diameter of 65 nm (adapted
from [251]). b) Hysteresis loops of the Ni wire at several values of the angle between the applied
field and the wire axis (adapted from [251]). c) Angular dependence of the switching field of an
ellipsoidal Co nanoparticle (25 nm in diameter) deposited on a microbridge; the inset shows a
cobalt nanoparticle (white spot) on the nanobridge (adapted from [252]).
The nanowires and the nanoparticles were dispersed in a chloroform and ethanol solvent
respectively and a single drop was placed on a chip containing about one hundred SQUIDs (see
section 4.2). In order to study the stochastic nature of the switching field, its distribution and
switching time were measured for both nanowire and Co nanoparticles. Fig. 49a shows a SEM
image of a microSQUID with a single Ni nanowire. The hysteresis loops, measured by a
microsQUID for different angles (θ) between the magnetic field and the wire axis, are reported in
Fig. 49b. The Fig.49c shows the angular dependence of the switching field for an ellipsoidal cobalt
nanoparticle. These measurements provided very useful information about the process of
magnetization reversal in both nanowire and nanoparticles. In particular, the data analysis showed
100

that, in the explored temperature range (0.2-6.0 K), the magnetization reversal of a well-prepared
ferromagnetic nanoparticles can be described by thermal activation over a single-energy barrier as
stated by Neel-Brown model [253]. Also for smallest nanowires, the measurements revealed a
thermal activated switching following the Arrhenius law according with the aforementioned model.
In a successive experiment, Wernsdorfer et al. [254] carried out switching field measurements of
individual ferromagnetic BaFeCoTiO (10-20 nm) nanoparticles in the temperature range of 0.1-6 K.
A cold mode technique was used in order to minimize the dissipation effects of the SQUID readout
(see section 4.2). For T<0.4 K a strong deviation from Neel-Brown theory was observed, which was
quantitatively explained by the theory of macroscopic quantum tunnelling of magnetization without
dissipation. In particular, they observed a thermal saturation of the switching field distribution
width indicating a saturation of the escape rate.
Later on, Bonet et al. [255] performed three-dimensional measurements of switching fields of
BaFeO nanoparticles in the size range of 10-20 nm, by using an improved SQUID technique, in
which, at first, the SQUID was switched off and a field was applied in an arbitrary direction, which
may or not cause a magnetization switching. Then, the SQUID was turned on and a second field
was applied in the plane of the SQUID to probe the resulting magnetization state. In such a way, the
entire field space can be scanned. Thanks to this improved technique, Jamet et al. investigated the
magnetic anisotropy in a single 1000-atom cobalt cluster [240,241]. They measuring the threedimensional diagram of the magnetization switching fields of a 3 nm cobalt cluster directly buried
within the superconducting film of a micro-SQUID. The data analysis demonstrated that magnetic
anisotropies of such individual nanoparticles was dominated by surface anisotropy.
Therion et al. [256] proposed a new method to overcome the restrictions due to high magnetic fields
required to reverse the magnetization of a nanoparticle. They applied a constant magnetic field well
below the switching field combined with a radio frequency (RF) field pulse. When the frequency of
RF field matches the precession frequency of the magnetization, energy can be pumped into the
system leading to magnetization reversal from the metastable to the stable well. The effectiveness
101

of this method was demonstrated on a Co nanoparticle having a diameter of 20 nm. The Fig. 50b
shows a SEM image of a SQUID based on nanobridge upon which two Co nanoparticle were
placed. The two dimensional switching field maps for static (black line) and for different
frequencies (colour lines) are reported in the Fig. 50c. The reversal magnetization occurs only for
field outside these curves (Stoner–Wohlfarth astroids). In specific field regions, the switching field
is strongly reduced by the RF pulse. It is possible to achieve a switching field reduction of about
100 mT with an RF pulse amplitude of few mT (at 4.4 GHz).

Fig. 50 a) Potential energy of a magnetic nanoparticle versus magnetization angle. An additional
alternative field induces oscillations of the magnetization in the energy wells. b) SEM image of Co
nanoparticles (white spot) on the SQUID nanobridge. c) Stoner–Wohlfarth astroids for different RF
magnetic pulses. This technique allows to reduce drastically the switching fields (adapted from
[256]).
It is worth to mention the use of arrays of microSQUIDs to investigate the magnetic properties of
macroscopic samples by measuring the magnetic field arising from its magnetization.
When a SQUID of the array is very close to the sample, it locally measures the magnetization
reversal whereas when the SQUID is far away, it integrates over a bigger sample volume. Such
102

device type has been successfully employed to investigate array of magnetic dots, crystal of
magnetic molecular cluster and nucleation and depinning of magnetic domain walls in thin films
[257,258].
Another interesting nanomagnetism application of microsized SQUIDs was proposed by MartinezPerez at al. [259], that used a microSQUID based on Josephson tunnel junctions to measure the
susceptibility of a single layer of nanomagnet dots deposited on the most sensitive SQUID area by
dip pen nanolithography [260]. The nanomagnets consisted of cobalt oxide nanoparticles (12 nm in
diameter) synthesized inside the protein nanocavity of horse spleen apoferritin. The estimated
magnetic moment of a single nanoparticle was about 12 µB. They measured the susceptibility of a
nanoparticle monolayer corresponding to about 107 molecules down to 13 mK and found that each
molecule preserved its magnetic properties.

Fig. 51 Measurements of magnetization reversal of ferritin nanoparticles attached to the gold
coating of a nanoSQUID having a flux capture area of about 0.04 µm2. The variation of applied
magnetic field was ± 4 mT. The magnetization reversal occurs after 285s and 4075 s for a) and b)
respectively (adapted from [242]).

103

The first use of a SQUID with a nano-sized loop to measure the magnetic response of magnetic
nanoparticles was done by Volarick and Lam [145]. They employed a gold-shunted nanoSQUID
(similar to that reported in Fig.21), to detect the magnetization reversal from ferritin nanoparticles,
obtained by horse-spleen. The single nanoparticle had a diameter of 8 nm and a magnetic moment
of 300 µB. A protein shell having a diameter of 12 nm, surrounded the nanoparticles core keeping
them separated, so that, the nanoparticles behave as isolated nanomagnets.
The nanoparticles were attached to the gold overlay above one of the nanobridge by using the
technique of chemical self-assembly described in the section 4.1.2 [242]. They applied a magnetic
field of approximately –2 mT or 2 mT perpendicular to the nanoSQUID plane and recorded the
SQUID output voltage for a total time ranging from 0.5 to 96 h. When the magnetization reversal
occurs a voltage jump was observed (Fig. 51). The amplitudes of corresponding magnetic flux
coupled to the SQUID, obtained by the ratio of the voltage jumps and the voltage responsivity, were
appreciably greater than the intrinsic noise of nanosensors. The authors repeated the same
measurements using nanoSQUIDs with no nanoparticles or with the linker molecules without
ferritin attached. The measurements did not show any flux jumps confirming that their origin was
due to the magnetization reversal of the ferritin nanoparticles. However, the simulation performed
by the authors provided an upper limit for of the magnetic flux change into the SQUID due to the
flipping ferritin moments. So that only about half of the observed jumps can be ascribed to the
magnetization reversal of ferritin nanoparticles.
By using the nanoSQUID shown in the Fig. 28, Russo et al. [174] and Granata et al. [190, 232]
investigate the magnetic properties of iron oxide nanoparticle having a diameter ranging from 4 to 8
nm. The nanoparticles were synthesized by thermal decomposition of metalorganic precursors in the
presence of oleic acid and oleylamine as surfactants and organic solvent with high boiling point
[174]. A solenoid surrounding the chip supplied the excitation field co-planar to the SQUID. They
measured the field dependence of magnetization at T=4.2 K (Fig.52 a and b) for two different sizes
of nanoparticles. The magnetic hysteresis loop indicate that the blocking temperature is well above
104

4.2 K for both nanoparticle types. The sigmoid shape of the virgin curve (Fig. 52b) suggests the
presence of dipole–dipole interparticle interactions, which tend to resist the magnetization process.
The applied field corresponding to the change in curvature of the virgin curve are about 100 and
350 Gauss for smallest and biggest nanoparticle respectively. They correspond to the magnetic
fields amplitude needed to overcome the magneto-crystalline anisotropy as well as the interparticle
interactions. The hysteretic loops reported in the Fig.51a, show a coercive field Hc ≅ 290 Gauss for
8 nm MNPs diameter and a Hc ≅ 100 Gauss for 4 nm MNPs diameter indicating an increase of
anisotropy as the particle size increases.

Fig. 52 a) Magnetic field dependence of magnetization for iron oxide nanoparticle having a
diameter of 4 nm (blue dots) and 8 nm (red dots) measured at T = 4 .2 K by using a nanoSQUID
shown in Fig. 28 b) first magnetization curve (adapted from [232]). c) Magnetic relaxation
measurement at T=4.2 K for 8 nm iron oxide nanoparticles diameter (red circle) compared with a
105

measurement performed by a commercial SQUID instrumentation (blue squares). The inset shows
the same measurements in a linear scale (adapted from [174]). d) Magnetic relaxation
measurements for a 6 nm iron oxide nanoparticle performed by the 3D nanoSQUID shown in Fig.
35. The blue square dots refer to the same measurement without nanoparticles (adapted from
[190]).
Usually, magnetic anisotropy increases as particle size decreases due to the increase of surface
component of anisotropy. The authors provided an explanation of this unexpected behaviour
ascribing it to the presence of oleic acid, covalently bounded to the particle surface. Relaxation
measurements at T=4.2 K for MNP having a diameter of 8 and 6 nm are reported in the Fig. 52 b
and c. The nanoparticles were cooled in a magnetic field of 10 mT from 300 K to 4.2 K, then the
magnetic field was switched off and the remnant magnetic moment was measured for
approximately 1000 seconds. The data were compared with those obtained by using a commercial
system Quantum Design SQUID Magnetometer (Fig. 52c, blue squares), confirming the
effectiveness of the nanoSQUID measurements. In addition, the nanoSQUID was capable to
analyse the magnetic relaxation behaviour in short time regime. This feature, unlike the commercial
set-up, allows to point out the slower magnetic relaxation for short times with respect to that for
longer times. The relaxation measurements reported in the Fig.52 d was performed using the 3D
nanoSQUID based on S/N-I/S tunnel junctions shown in Fig.35 and concern iron oxide
nanoparticles having a diameter of 6 nm. An exponential decay typical of relaxation phenomena
was observed. The red squares in the Fig.52 d refers to the same measurements without
nanoparticles. After inverting the magnetic field, the nanoSQUID goes rapidly to another constant
value, having a time dependence negligible with respect to the signal arising from the nanoparticle
relaxation. This check measurement guarantees that the eventual vortex penetration during the field
cooling does not affect the relaxation measurement.

106

Fig. 53 a) Magnetic flux noise spectra of a nanoSQUID (shown in Fig. 46a) with (red dots) and
without (black dots) FePt nanobead (adapted from [236]. b) Magnetization loop of a single FePt
nanobead obtained by the measurement of the magnetic hysteresis of the output voltage due to the
magnetic nano-object (adapted from [235]).
Hao et al. [235, 236], by using the nanoSQUID shown in Fig. 46a, measured the magnetic response
of a single iron-platinum (FePt) nanobead with 40:60 (Fe:Pt) composition and fabricated from a
water-based solution of FePt nanoparticles with an average diameter of 3.8 nm. The single
nanobead, having a diameter ranging from 70 to 200 nm, was positioned onto SQUID by using the
SEM technique in the previous section. The magnetic flux noise spectral densities with and without
nanobeads at T=7.8 is reported in the Fig. 53a. At high frequencies, the noise does not increase
whereas at low frequencies an additional noise appears as highlighted by the difference between the
two curve with and without nanobeads. This behaviour may arise from the individual low-frequency
moment fluctuations below the blocking temperature of the particles [236]. The magnetization
loops of a single 150 nm sized nanobead, measured at T=7.8 K and for increasing magnetic field up
to 10 mT are shown in Fig. 53b. The curves were obtained by measuring the magnetic hysteresis of
the periodic response of SQUID due to the presence of FePt nanobead. The presence of a remnant,
moment also at the lowest field sweep, indicates that the temperature of 7.8 K is already below the
blocking temperature. The author estimated a nanobead dipole moment of 106 µB.

107

Before moving on the other nanoSQUID applications, it is worth to mention a very recent
measurements carried out by employing a HTc nanoSQUID. Schwarz et al. have successfully used
a low noise YBCO nanoSQUID based on grain boundary junctions to measure at T=4.2 K the
magnetization reversal of iron nanowire with a diameter of 39 nm (Fig. 254). The latter was
encapsulated in a carbon nanotube and positioned close to the SQUID loop by manipulator inside a
FIB-SEM system. Switching of the magnetization was detected at a magnetic field of ±100 mT,
which was in very good agreement with estimated value [261].

Fig. 54 a) SEM Image of YBCO nanoSQUID with Fe nanowire located close to the SQUID loop.
b) Histereis loop of Fe nanowire. The switching of the magnetization occurs at a filed of about 100
mT. The horizontal red dotted lines indicate the literature value Ms=±1710 kA/m. (Adapted from
[235]).
4.3 Other applications
4.3.1 Scanning magnetic microscopy with an ultra high spatial resolution
As mentioned in the section 1.5, micro sized SQUIDs have been widely employed for scanning
magnetic microscopy, allowing very interesting application in view of fundamental studies of
superconductor [102], magnetic materials and micro-sized magnetic beads [262-264]. In a SQUID,
scanning magnetic microscope (SSM) the spatial resolution is limited by the size of the micro pickcoil and the distance from the sample under investigation, typically, of the order of few µm. The
development of nanoSQUIDs fabricated on a quartz tip (section 3.4) could appreciably increase the
spatial resolution of SSMs. To demonstrate the effectiveness of nanoSQUID for magnetic
108

microscopy with an ultra-high spatial resolution, Finkler et al. developed [206] a SSM based on an
Al nanoSQUID fabricated on a quartz sharp pipette with a tip diameter ranging from 100 to 400 nm.
The nanosensor was glued to a quartz tuning fork allowing scanning within few nm from the surface
of the sample to investigate. Such innovative instrumentation was employed to image the vortex
lattice and local magnetic response of different materials (Al, Nb and NbSe2) with spatial resolution
of about 200 nm.
Later, Vasukov et al. [207] employed the Pb nanoSQUID shown in the Fig. 39 to image vortices in
a Nb thin film (Fig. 55) achieving an even better spatial resolution. During the measurement the
nanoSQUID was placed at a constant height of 50 nm above the sample and the scanning was
performed by an attocube-integrated scanner. The scan areas were (1×1) µm2 (Fig. 54a) and
(300×300) nm2 (Fig. 55b); the applied fields were B = 28 mT and 0.2 T for measurements reported
in Fig. 54a and 54b respectively. The pronounced peaks displayed in the figure correspond to the
vortex centres. The minimum distance between the vortices was 330 nm (Fig. 55a) and 120 nm (Fig.
55b)

Fig. 55 Magnetic field distribution generated by an a.c. transport current flowing in a 3 µm wide
Nb strip. The measurements were performed by two different Pb nanoSQUIDs fabricated on a

109

quartz tip having a diameter of 117 nm (right scanning) and 88 nm (left scanning) (adapted from
[207]).
Nagel et al. [265] developed a multifunctional sensor consisting of a low temperature magnetic
force microscope obtained by using a Ni nanotube, protruded from the cantilever end by few µm, as
a ferromagnetic tip for a Nb nanoSQUID. A nichel nanotube, protruded from the cantilever end by
few µm. The cantilever was perpendicular to the nanoSQUID, which was moved by a three
dimensional piezoelectric positioning stage (Attocube, System AG). The nanoSQUID, in vertical
configuration, was based on sub-micrometric Nb/HfTi/Nb Josephson junctions (see Fig. 34). They
determined the spatial dependence of magnetic coupling between the Ni nanotube and the
nanoSQUID, obtaining useful information about magnetic coupling factor, which is directly related
to the spin sensitivity (formulas 27, 28). In this way, it is possible to experimentally identify the
position of highest sensitivity of a nanoSQUID. By using the magnetic force microscope, they
detected the Abrikosov vortices, which are trapped within the nanoSQUID structure when high
magnetic field is applied. The authors noted that the Ni nanotube can be also considered as a nanosample to investigate and, in this case, the nanoSQUID is used either as a detector of Ni nanotube
displacements or as a local probe of the stray field produced by the Ni nanotube. As displacement
detector, a sensitivity as low as 110 fm/Hz1/2 at an operation temperature of 4.3 K was estimated.
4.3.2 Nanoscale electromechanical system (NEMS) resonator readout
As stated in the introduction section, a SQUID is able to detect, with an unequalled sensitivity, a
magnetic flux or any physical quantities that can be converted into magnetic flux such as magnetic
fields, currents, voltage, displacements and temperature. As concern as the displacement detection,
satisfactory results have been achieved by using micro-sized SQUID [266-267]. Ultra high sensitive
detection of displacements at nanoscale level and in the GHz range plays a key role for
nanoelectromechanical system (NEMS). In fact, the small displacements of these miniaturized
devices induce very low signals which are overwhelmed by parasitic background. Therefore,
efficient actuation and sensitive detection at the nanoscale remains a challenge. Due to nanoscale
110

effects, NEMS present interesting and unique characteristics, which deviate greatly from their
predecessor microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). The main potential applications of NEMS
based devices are single molecules biosensing, information storage, nanoscale refrigerator and high
sensitivity sensors of mass, force, heat capacities [268].
In the recent years, the quantum detection group of NPL laboratories (UK) proposed nanoSQUIDs
as an effective readout of a NEMS resonator [157, 269-271]. The basic principle of the
measurement lies on the coupling between the electrically conducting resonator and the SQUID
loop. This produces a SQUID inductance variation and a consequent change of the output signal.

Fig. 56 a) SEM images of a microSQUID including a silicon resonator for nanoelectromechanical
applications (adapted from [157]). The response to an excitation by Lorentz drive force method is
shown in b) (adapted from [157]). c) and d) SEM images of a nanoSQUID in a slot shape with and
without the carbon nano-resonator (adapted from [271]).
111

The use of a SQUID with a nano-loop optimizes the magnetic coupling between the nanometric
moving parts of NEMS resonator and the SQUID. The Fig. 56 reports the nanodevices fabricated by
NPL group [157, 271].
The SQUID of Fig.56a was fabricated by FIB, starting from a bilayer of Nb/W and included two
Dayem nanobridges having both length and width of 60-80 nm. This SQUID is similar to that
depicted in Fig.23a but with a flux capture area of about (20x20) µm2. The silicon resonator,
positioned over the nanoSQUID loop by a carbon fibre microprobe, has been also fabricated by FIB
milling and consist of a central beam (1 µm in width, 40 µm in length and 800 nm tick) including at
its centre a circular paddle (15 µm in diameter). The resonator was excited by a Lorentz force drive
method. A radio frequency current is sent into the central wire of the resonator while a magnetic
field is applied in the plane of the SQUID. So, an oscillating Lorentz force (F=-i l x B) acts on the
wire of length l. The resonant frequencies were calculated by using a suitable software exploiting
the finite elements method [157]. The frequency values relative to z-displacements was about 2.2
kHz where those relative to x and y torsion ranges from 2.2 to 7.8 MHz. A preliminary measurement
at T=7.7 K showing the SQUID output is reported in the Fig. 56b. The applied magnetic field and
the RF current were 0.22 T and 33 µA respectively. The peaks in the figure, probably, correspond to
lowest frequencies of resonant mode of the paddle. In order to increase the magnetic coupling and
to extend the usable excitation field, an improved nanodevice has been developed by the same
group [270]. The large SQUID loop area was replaced by a slotted nanoSQUID having an area of
(0.9×0.1) µm2 (Fig. 56c) and the resonator, consisting of a double clamped Si beam (0.1 µm wide
and 1 µm length), was attached on top of the SQUID slot (Fig. 56d).
4.3.3 Single photon and macromolecule detection
The development of ultra high sensitive single photon detectors plays a crucial role for several
applications in science and technology. In medical imaging, for instance, single photons are
detected in PET (Positron Emission Tomography) and CT (Computer Tomography) scanners and,
more recently, in laser optical imaging. Lifetime fluorescence measurements using single photon
112

counting is also used in the diagnosis of some medical conditions. It is also widely used in
analytical chemistry for determining the chemical recipe of samples. Moreover, single photon
detection is extensively used in scientific research in the fields of particle physics, astrophysics,
quantum cryptography and materials science. Superconducting transition-edge bolometer are among
the most sensitive detectors of electromagnetic radiation extending in wavelength from x-rays to the
far infrared [271, 272]. In this framework, a nanoSQUID based device has been proposed as a
promising superconducting single photon and macromolecule detector [273-276], in which, a
radiation absorber (superconductive thin film patch) is placed within the loop of nanoSQUID and is
maintained just below its critical temperature (Fig. 57a). The SQUID has higher transition
temperature than the absorber. When a photon hits the absorber, its temperature increases slightly,
causing a variation of the inductance (L) of the SQUID due to the change of the London penetration
depth (λ) of the absorber. The temperature variation caused by the incident photons increases by
decreasing the heat capacitance of the absorber. Therefore, in order to obtain a suitable sensitivity,
the absorber could be as small as possible, and the SQUID loop could have having the same size of
the absorber. A quantitative estimation of the detector sensitivity can be obtained by calculating the
variation of the SQUID voltage output with the temperature:
dV dV dL dλ
=
dT dL dλ dT

(43)

By using the detailed calculation of the second member reported in [272], the above formula
becomes:
2
λ ( 0) T 3
dV 6πR dyn I c µ 0 a
≈
3
dT
L2
  T 4  2
1 −    T 4
  Tc   c



(44)

Where Rdyn is the dynamic resistance of the nanoSQUID and a its loop radius. Using realistic values
for all parameters included in the (44), a sensitivity of 10 mV/K can be estimated. Considering a low
noise amplifier with SV1/2= 1nV/Hz1/2, a temperature change of 0.1 µK per bandwidth unit should be

113

detected. It corresponds to an energy sensitivity as low as 10-25 J/Hz for a Nb absorber having a
diameter of 0.8 µm, a thickness of 50 nm and operating at T=0.1 K.
In the device shown in the Fig. 57b [276], the Nb nanoSQUID had a loop area of (200×200) nm2.
The film thicknesses of the nanoSQUID and the Nb absorber were 20 nm and 14 nm respectively
resulting in a critical temperature of 7.9 K for the SQUID and 6.3 K for the absorber.

Fig. 57 a) Scheme of a nanoSQUID based device for single photon detection. b) SEM image of a Nb
nanoSQUID with a Nb absorber located inside the loop. c) NanoSQUID response to chopper laser
light at T=6.3 K (adapted from [276]).
Preliminary test were performed at temperature of about to 6.3 K using a chopped He-Ne laser to
heat the absorber. Voltage pulses corresponding to the laser light exposure were recorded at the
SQUID output with a SNR=50, demonstrating the feasibility of the detector (Fig.57c). Another
possible application of this nano-detector could be in energy-resolving detector of massive (>200
amu) molecular or polymeric species. In the conventional mass spectrometer, the sensitivity is
related to the velocity of the molecule, which decrease inversely with its mass making it inefficient
for big molecules. Instead, in this detector, the signal is directly related to the molecule kinetic
energy, which is independent on the mass for a given ion beam [273].
4.3.4 Nanoelectronics and Quantum computing
Tejada et al. [277] proposed a new magnetic approach for quantum bits, based on the employment
of both ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic nanoparticle clusters. Such magnetic systems could be
suitable candidates for quantum hardware for two main reasons. Very small nanoparticles have

114

large total spin (of the order of few hundreds ħ), so they are easier to measure with respect to single
spin. The second reason is their high magnetic anisotropy barrier leading to an energy separation
between the two lowest levels inside the potential well of a few Kelvins. Moreover, nanoparticle
clusters can be considered as a mesoscopic system. In fact, their magnetic state are defined by the
collective motions of all their constituent particles and, at the same time, they consist of thousand
nucleons and electrons.

Fig. 58 Schematic draw of the realization of coupled controlled quantum bits. The nanoSQUID
loops (orange colour) are magnetically coupled to nanoparticles quantum bit (grey colour) [277].
The Fig.58 shows a schematic example of the realization of coupled controlled quantum bit. The
magnetic qubits (grey colour) are arranged in one or two-dimensional lattice and coupled to both
superconducting circuit (green colour) containing Josephson switch (yellow colour) and loops of
nano-SQUIDs (red colour). The quantum state of each qubit can be manipulated by sending
electromagnetic signals to superconducting coupling circuit whereas the state measurement can be
performed by the individual nanoSQUID. The required sensitivity is about (10-100) µB that is
comparable with the sensitivities exhibited by recent nanoSQUIDs.
Another prospective application of NanoSQUIDs is in the nanoelectronics. In this framework, the
nanoSQUID have been proposed as a flux flow transistor [278] and trapped-vortex memory device
[278]. As regard as the transistor, Lam [279] demonstrated that a Josephson nanodevice, including a
nanoSQUID (similar to that shown in Fig. 21) and a single Nb strip, can acts as a gate and
115

employed as three-terminal device (Fig. 59). The width of the strip is 1 µm and the separation from
the nanoSQUID is 0.15 µm. By sending a suitable current in the Nb strip, it is possible to couple a
magnetic flux into the SQUID loop and consequently modulate the current-voltage characteristics.
If the SQUID is biased with a current a little bit lower than the critical value, the current flowing in
the gate (control line current) can modulate the output voltage. For the device reported by Lam, a
gate current ∆Ig = 130 µA was required to obtain a maximum critical modulation ∆Ic=40 µA
corresponding to a voltage output of 180 mV resulting in a current gain gc=∆Ic/∆Ig=0.3 and a
transresistance rm=∆V/∆Ig=1.3 Ω. The main advantages of the superconducting three-terminal
based on nanoSQUIDs is the large-scale integration.

Fig. 59 a) SEM Image of a three-terminal nanodevice based on a nanoSQUID coupled to a control
gate line located very close to the SQUID loop. b) I-V characteristics for different control line
current values. c) NanoSQUID output as a function of the control line current (adapted from
[278]).
As seen in the section 1.4, magnetic vortices can penetrate in the superconducting structures and
cause low frequency noise. In fact, to avoid the entry of vortices or their activated thermally motion,
116

careful designs of the device has to be take into consideration. However, single vortex at localized
trapping site can be used as a memory bit as proposed in the late ‘70s [280]. In the early ‘80s,
Uehara and Nagata [281] investigated a memory cell based on multiple trapped vortices in
superconducting thin film. The main obstacle to develop suitable memory device was the poor scale
integration of the single cell memory, which had a size of some tens of µm. Exploiting the
submicron size of nanoSQUIDs, Lam and Gnanarajan [278] proposed them as trapped-vortex
memory device with the potentiality for high-density structures. In this case, the two logic states
(‘0’ and ‘1’) of the memory cell are related to the presence or not of a trapped vortex in a pinning
centre. A pinned vortex causes a magnetic hysteresis in the Ic-Φ characteristics of the nanoSQUIDs.
The occurring remnant magnetic field can be measured by the Ic value of nanoSQUID. They
investigated the vortex penetration in the nanoSQUID body by measuring the Ic-Β and the currentvoltage characteristics for different applied magnetic fields. An appreciable magnetic hysteresis due
to vortex penetration was observed in the magnetic pattern of the nanoSQUID, suggesting the
possibility to apply the nanoSQUID as memory cells.
5. Summary and conclusions
In summary, we have presented a review about nanoSQUID including the foundamental, the
fabrication technique, the different type of nanodevice and the applications.
Since the realization of the first nanoSQUID (2003), the fabrication, the design and the
characterization of these nanosensors has been appreciably improved reaching spin sensitivity less
than one electron spin per unit bandwidth. It is due to the progress, during the last ten years, in
nanofabrication techniques, low noise readout circuits and performance simulations.
Different nanoSQUIDs have been recognized. Dayem or HTc nanoSQUIDs are superior when high
magnetic fields ( > 0.5 T) are involved, since nanoSQUIDs based on trilayer Josephson junctions
(SNS or SNIS) show a critical current modulation due to the residual magnetic field parallel to the
SQUID loop, preventing the correct operation of the SQUID. Moreover, HTc nanoSQUIDs allow to
operate in a wider range of the temperature (from mK to above 77 K). On the other hand, the SNS
117

or SNIS nanoSQUIDs exhibit a critical current modulation depth of more than 70%, compared to
the 20%–30% values for most of Dayem nanoSQUIDs resulting in an improved responsivity and
magnetic flux resolution.
It is worth to emphasize the development of nanoSQUIDs based on innovative technique such as
those based on CNT or nanoSQUID on a tip.

In addition to promising applications in

nanomagnetism, CNT nanoSQUIDs also offer the possibility to investigate interesting physical
phenomena such as Kondo physics [283], and the generation of entangled electrons pairs in a
carbon nanotube [284]. The nanoSQUID fabricated on the apex of a quartz tip combine an ultra
high magnetic moment sensitivity (0.38 µB/Hz1/2) with a spatial resolution lower than 1 µm,
providing a new tool for quantitative nanoscale scanning magnetic microscopy with single spin
sensitivity.
As regard as the applications, while many of the SQUID applications involve the detection of tiny
magnetic signals from relatively distant objects, the devices presented in this review are aimed to
the detection of nearby nanoscale objects. One of the most interesting application is the
investigation of single magnetic nanoparticle. In fact, although techniques for measuring the
magnetic properties of large particles or collections of nanoparticles are well established, single
nanoparticle measurements are less straightforward and become increasingly challenging as the
particle dimensions and magnetic moments are reduced. The investigation of nanoparticles at
nanoscale level could be of significance not only for the information technology and the quantum
computing but also for future medical and biological applications. In this context, the numerous
experiments on single nanoparticle, nanowire and nanobead, performed by using nanoSQUIDs,
have demonstrated the effectiveness of these quantum nanodevices to investigate the magnetic
properties of the matter at nanoscale level. Other stimulating applications could be the single photon
detection, the readout of nano-electromechanical system resonator, nanoelectroning and quantum
computing.

118

In conclusion, we would like to stress that, even if the nanoSQUID remains an object of dedicated
research, the obtained results are very encouraging in view of a wide employment of this
nanodevice for severals nanoscale applications.
References
[1] The SQUID handbook vol I : Fundamentals and technology of SQUIDs and SQUID systems” J.
Clarke and A. I. Braginski eds. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KgaA, Weinheim, (2004).
[2] The SQUID handbook vol II: Fundamentals and technology of SQUIDs and SQUID systems”
J. Clarke and A. I. Braginski eds. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KgaA, Weinheim, (2006).
[3] R. K. Fagaly, Superconducting quantum interference device instruments and applications, Rev.
Sci. Instrum. 77 (2006 ) 101101.
[4] Applied Superconductivity: Handbook on Devices and Applications, P. Seidel ed., Wiley,
Weinheim (2015).
[5] P. D. Nation, M. P. Blencowe, A. J. Rimberg, E. Buks, Analogue Hawking radiation in a dcSQUID array transmission line, Phys. Rev.Lett, 103 (2009) 087004.
[6] C. M. Wilson, G. Johansson, A. Pourkabirian, M. Simoen, J. R. Johansson, T. Duty, F. Nori, and
P. Delsing, Observation of the dynamical Casimir effect in a superconducting circuit, Nature, 479
(2011) 376.
[7] M. Veldhorst, C. G. Molenaar, X. L. Wang, H. Hilgenkamp, and A.Brinkman, Experimental
realization of superconducting quantum interference devices with topological insulator junctions,
Appl. Phys.Lett., 100 (2012) 072602.
[8] F. Giazzotto, M.G. Martinez-Perez, The Josephson heat interferometer, Nature, 492 (2012) 401.
[9] J. E. Carlstrom, G. P. Holder, E. D. Reese, Cosmology with the Sunyaev–Zel’dovich Effect,
Ann. Rev.Astron. Astrophys., 40 (2002) 643–680.
[10] F. Marin et al., Gravitational bar detectors set limits to Planck-scale physics on macroscopic
variables, Nature Phys., 9 (2012) 71–73.

119

[11] P. A. R. Ade et al., Detection of B-Mode Polarization at Degree Angular Scales by BICEP2,
Phys. Rev.Lett, 112 (2014) 241101.
[12] D. Gatteschi, R. Sessoli, Quantum Tunneling of Magnetization and Related Phenomena in
Molecular Materials, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 42 (2003) 268-287.
[13] S. D. Bader, Colloquium: Opportunities in nanomagnetism, Rev. Mod. Phys. 78 (2006) 1-15.
[14] A. M. Chang, H. D. Hallen, L. Harriott, H. F. Hess, H. L. Kao, J. Kwo, R. E. Miller, R. Wolfe,
J. van der Ziel, T. Y. Chang, Scanning Hall probe microscopy., Appl. Phys. Lett., 61 (1992)19741976.
[15] M. Bode, Spin-polarized scanning tunnelling microscopy, Rep. Prog. Phys., 66 (2003) 523
[16] Y. Martin, H. K. Wickramasinghe, Magnetic imaging by ‘force microscopy’ with 1000 Å
resolution. Appl. Phys. Lett., 50 (1987) 1455–1457.
[17] R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, M. R. McCartney, R. B. Frankel, D. A. Bazylinski, M. Posfai, P.R.
Buseck, Magnetic microstructure of magnetotactic bacteria by electron holography. Science 282
(1998)1868–1870
[18] J. R. Mazeet et al., Nanoscale magnetic sensing with an individual electronic spin in diamond,
Nature, 455 (2008) 644–647.
[19] J. M. Taylor et al., High-sensitivity diamond magnetometer with nanoscale resolution, Nature
Phys. 4, (2008) 810–816.
[20] M. S. Grinolds, S. Hong, P. Maletinsky, L. Luan, M. D. Lukin, R. L. Walsworth, A. Yacoby,
Nanoscale magnetic imaging of a single electron spin under ambient conditions, Nature Phys., 9
(2013) 215–219.
[21] D. Le Sage, K. Arai, D. R. Glenn, S. J. DeVience, L. M. Pham, L. Rahn-Lee, M. D. Lukin, A.
Yacoby, A. Komeili, R. L. Walsworth, Optical magnetic imaging of living cells, Nature, 496 (2013)
486–491.
[22] C. P. Foley and H. Hilgenkamp, hy NanoSQUIDs are important: An introduction to the focus
issue, upercond. Sci. Technol., 22 (2009) 064001.
120

[23] W. Wernsdorfer, From micro to nano-SQUIDs: Applications to nanomagnetism, Supercond.
Sci. Technol., 22 (2009) 064013.
[24] L Hao, D Cox, P See, J Gallop. O Kazakova, Magnetic nanoparticle detection using nanoSQUID sensors, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys, 43 (2010) 474004.
[25] R. C. Jaklevic, J. Lambe, A. H. Silver, J. E. Mercereau, Quantum interference effects in
Josephson tunneling, Phys. Rev.Lett., 12 (1964) 159-160.
[26] A.H. Silver, J.E. Zimmerman, Quantum states and transitions in weakly connected
superconducting rings, Phys. Rev., 157 (1967) 317–341.
[27] R. Cantor, in SQUID Sensors: Fundamentals, Fabrication and Applications, edited by H.
Weinstock, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publisher, Series E: Applied Sciences-Vol. 329 (1996),
179.
[28] B. D. Josephson, Possible new effects in superconductive tunneling, Phys. Lett., 1 (1962)
251–253.
[29] R. Doll, M. Nabauer, Experimental proof of magnetic flux quantization in a superconducting
ring, Phys. Rev. Lett., 7 (1961) 51–52.
[30] D. D. Coon, M. D. Fiske, Josephson ac and step structure in the supercurrent tunneling
characteristics, Phys. Rev., 138 (1965) A744–A746.
[31] A. Barone, G. Paterno, Physics and Applications of the Josephson Effect. New York: John
Wiley & Sons. (1982).
[32] D. Koelle, R. Kleiner, F. Ludwig, E. Dantsker, J. Clarke, High transition temperature
superconducting quantum interference devices, Rev. Mod. Phys., 71(1999) 631–686.
[33] F. Tafuri, J. Kirtley, Weak links in high critical temperature superconductors, Rep. Prog. Phys.,
68 (2005) 2573.
[34] W. Meissner, R. Oschsenfeld, Eh neuer Effekt bei Eintritt der Supraleitfahigkeit (A new
effect concerning the onset of superconductivity), Die Naturwissenschaften, 21 (1933) 787

121

[35] W.C. Stewart, Current-voltage characteristics of Josephson junctions, Appl. Phys. Lett., 12
(1968) 277–280.
[36] D.E. McCumber, Effect of ac impedance on dc voltage-current characteristics of Josephson
junctions, J. Appl. Phys., 39 (1968) 3113–3118.
[37] R. F. Voss, R. B. Laibowitz, A. N. Broers, S. I. Raider, C. M. Knoedler and J M Viggiano,
Ultra low noise Nb DC SQUIDs, IEEE Trans. Magn.,17 (1981) 395-399.
[38] C. Tesche, J.Clarke, DC SQUID: noise and optimization, J. Low. Temp. Phys, 29 (1977)
301–331.
[39] T.Ryhanen, H. Seppa, R. Illimoniemi, J. Knuutila, SQUID magnetometers for low-frequency
applications, J. Low Temp. Phys., 76 (1989), 287–386.
[40] V. J. de Waal, P. Schrijner, R. Llurba, Simulation and optimization of a DC squid with finite
capacitance, J. Low Temp. Phys., 54 (1984) 215–232.
[41] J. Clarke “SQUID fundamentals”, in SQUID sensors: fundamentals, fabrication and
application, H. Weinstock

Ed., Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publisher, Series E: Applied

Sciences-Vol. 329 (1996), 1-62.
[42] J. Clarke, W. M.Goubau, M.B. Ketchen, Tunnel junction dc SQUID: fabrication, operation and
performance, J. Low Temp. Phys., 25 (1976), 99–144.
[43] F. Wellstood, C. Heiden, J. Clarke, Integrated dc SQUID magnetometer with a high slew rate,
Rev. Sci. Instrum., 55 (1984) 952–957.
[44] D. Drung, “Advanced SQUID read-out electronics” in SQUID sensors: fundamentals,
fabrication and application, H. Weinstock Ed., Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publisher, Series E:
Applied Sciences-Vol. 329 (1996) 63-116.
[45] D. Drung, R. Cantor, M. Peters, A. J. Scheer, and H. Koch, “Low-noise high-speed dc
superconducting quantum interference device magnetometer with simplified feedback electronics”
Appl. Phys. Lett., 57 (1990) 406-408.

122

[46] R. F. Voss, Noise characteristics of an ideal shunted Josephson junction, J. Low. Temp. Phys.,
42 (1981) 151–163.
[47] O. Astafiev, Yu. A. Pashkin, Y. Nakamura, T. Yamamoto, J. S. Tsai, Quantum Noise in the
Josephson Charge Qubit, Phys. Rev. Lett., 93 (2004), 267007.
[48] R. F. Voss, R. B. Laibowitz and A. N. Broers, Niobium nanobrldge dc SQUID, Appl. Phys.
Lett. 37 (1980) 656
[49] D. D. Awschalom, J. B. Rozen, M. B. Ketchen, W. J. Gallagher, A. W. Kleinsasser, R. L.
Sandstrom, B. Bumble, Low-noise modular microsusceptometer using nearly quantum limited de
SQUIDs, Appl. Phys. Lett., 53 (1988), 2108
[50] B. Chesca, Analytical theory of dc SQUIDS operating in the presence of thermal fluctuations,
J. Low.Temp.Phys., 112 (1998) 165–196.
[51] C. Granata, A. Vettoliere, R. Russo, M. Russo, and B. Ruggiero, Critical current noise
investigations in underdamped Josephson devices, Phys. Rev. B, 83 (2011) 092504.
[52] J. Clarke, G. Hawkins, Flicker (1f) noise in Josephson tunnel junctions, Phys. Rev. B, 14
(1976) 2826
[53] Quantum Computing and Quantum Bits in Mesoscopic Systems, edited by A. J. Leggett, B.
Ruggiero, P. Silvestrini (Plenum, New York, 2004).
[54] D. J. Van Harlingen, T. L. Robertson, B. L. T. Plourde, P. A. Reichardt, T. A. Crane, John
Clarke, Decoherence in Josephson-junction qubits due to critical-current fluctuations, Phys. Rev. B,
70 (2004) 064517
[55] R. de Sousa, K. B. Whaley, T. Hecht, J. von Delft, and F. K. Wilhelm, Microscopic model of
critical current noise in Josephson-junction qubits: Subgap resonances and Andreev bound states,
Phys. Rev. B, 80 (2009) 094515.
[56] L. Faoro and L. B. Ioffe, Microscopic origin of low-frequency flux noise in josephson circuits,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 100 (2008) 227005.

123

[57] M. Constantin and C. C. Yu, Microscopic model of critical current noise in Josephson
junctions, Phys. Rev. Lett., 99 (2007) 207001.
[58] S. M. Anton et al., Low-frequency critical current noise in Josephson junctions induced by
temperature fluctuations, Appl. Phys. Lett., 101 (2012) 092601.
[59] S. Sendelbach, D. Hover, A. Kittel, M. Muck, J. M. Martinis, and R. McDermott, Magnetism
in SQUIDs at Millikelvin Temperatures, Phys. Rev. Lett., 100 (2008) 227006.
[60] R. H. Koch, D. P. Di Vincenzo, J. Clarke, Model for 1/f flux noise in SQUIDs and qubits,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 98 (2007) 267003.
[61] J. Eroms, L. C. van Schaarenburg, E. F. C. Driessen, J. H. Plantenberg, C. M. Huizinga, R. N.
Schouten, A. H. Verbruggen, C. J. P. M. Harmans, and J. E. Mooij, Low-frequency noise in
Josephson junctions for superconducting qubits, Appl. Phys. Lett., 89 (2006) 122516
[62] F. C. Wellstood, C. Urbina, and John Clarke, Flicker (1⁄f) noise in the critical current of
Josephson junctions at 0.09–4.2 K, Appl. Phys. Lett., 85 (2004) 5296-5298.
[63] R.H. Koch, J.Clarke, W.M. Goubau, J.M. Martinis, C.M. Pegrum, and D.J. Van Harlingen,
Flicker (1/f) noise in tunnel junction dc-SQUIDs, J. Low Temp. Phys., 51 (1983) 207–224.
[65] E. Dantsker, S. Tanaka, P. A. Nilsson, R. Kleiner, J. Clarke, Reduction of 1/f noise in high-T c
dc superconducting quantum interference devices cooled in an ambient magnetic field, Appl. Phys.
Lett., 69 (1996) 4099-4101.
[66] E. Dantsker, S. Tanaka, J. Clarke, High-T c SQUIDs with slots or holes: low 1/f noise in
ambient magnetic fields, Appl. Phys. Lett., 70 (1997) 2037–2039.
[67] A. B. M. Jansman, M. Izquierdo, J. Flokstra, H. Rogalla, Slotted high-Tc dc SQUID
magnetometers, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 9 (1999) 3290–3293.
[68] R.H. Koch, J.Z. Sun, V. Foglietti, W.J. Gallagher, Flux dam: a method to reduce extra low
frequency noise when a superconducting magnetometer is exposed to a magnetic field, Appl. Phys.
Lett., 67 (1995) 709–711.

124

[69] S. M. Anton et al., Magnetic Flux Noise in dc SQUIDs: Temperature and Geometry
Dependence, Phys. Rev. Lett., 110 (2013) 147002.
[70] T. Lanting, M. H. Amin, A. J. Berkley, C. Rich, S.-F. Chen, S. LaForest, R. de Sousa,
Evidence for temperature-dependent spin diffusion as a mechanism of intrinsic flux noise in
SQUIDs, Phys. Rev. B, 89 (2014) 014503.
[71] C. Granata, A. Vettoliere and M. Russo, Miniaturized superconducting quantum interference
magnetometers for high sensitivity applications, Appl. Phys. Lett., 91 (2007) 122509.
[72] D. Drung, S. Knappe, H. Koch, Theory for the multiloop dc superconducting quantum
interference device magnetometer and experimental verification, J. Appl. Phys., 77 (1995) 40884098.
[73] M. Schmelz, R. Stolz, V. Zakosarenko, T. Schonau, S. Anders, L. Fritzsch, M. Muck, H-G
Meyer, Field-stable SQUID magnetometer with sub-fT Hz− 1/2 resolution based on sub-micrometer
cross-type Josephson tunnel junctions, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 24 (2011) 065009.
[74] R. Monaco, C. Granata, R. Russo, A. Vettoliere, Ultra-low-noise magnetic sensing with long
Josephson tunnel junctions, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 26 (2013) 125005.
[75] C. Granata, A. Vettoliere, R. Monaco, Noise performance of superconductive magnetometers
based on long Josephson tunnel junctions, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 27 (2014) 095003.
[76] A. Vettoliere, C. Granata, R. Monaco, Long Josephson Junction in Ultralow-Noise
Magnetometer Configuration, IEEE Trans. Magn., 51 (2015) 9000104.
[77] J. Luomahaara, V. Vesterinen, L. Gronberg, J.Hassel, Kinetic inductance magnetometer,
Nature Commun., (2014) DOI: 10.1038/ncomms5872
[78] M.B. Ketcken, Design of improved integrated thin-film planar dc SQUID gradiometers, J.
Appl. Phys., 58 (1985) 4323.
[79] B. Muhlfelder, W. Johnson, M. W. Cromar, Double transformer coupling to a very low noise
SQUID, IEEE Trans. Magn., 19 (1983) 303-307

125

[80] V. Polushkin, E. Gu, D. Glowacka, D. Goldie, J. Lumley, A tightly coupled dc SQUID with an
intermediary transformer, Physica C, 367 (2002) 280-284.
[81] D. Drung, J. Beyer, M. Peters, J.-H. Storm, T. Schurig, Novel SQUID current sensors with
high linearity at high frequencies, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 19, (2009) 772-777.
[82] C. Granata, A. Vettoliere, M. Russo, An ultralow noise current amplifier based on
superconducting quantum interference device for high sensitivity applications, Rev. Sci. Instrum, 82
(2011) 013901.
[83] V Zakosarenko, M Schmelz, R Stolz, T Sch¨onau, L Fritzsch, S Anders, H-G Meyer,
Femtoammeter on the base of SQUID with thin-film flux transformer, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 25
(2012) 095014.
[84] M. B. Ketchen, J. M. Jaycox, Ultra-low-noise tunnel junction dc SQUID with a tightly coupled
planar input coil, Appl. Phys. Lett., 40 (1982) 736-738
[85] M.B. Ketchen “Integrated thin-film dc SQUID sensors” IEEE Trans. on Magn, 23 (1987)16501657.
[86] M.B. Ketchen, W.J. Gallagher, A. W. Kleinsasser, S. Murphy and J. R. Clem “dc SQUID flux
focuser”, in SQUID ’85: Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices and their Applications, H.
D. Hadlbohm and H. Lubbig Ed., Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, New York, 1985, pp.865-871.
[87] Vu L.N., M. S. Wistrom, D. J. Van Harlingen, Imaging of magnetic

vortices

in

superconducting networks and clusters by scanning SQUID microscopy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 63
(1993)1693-1695.
[88] J.R. Kirtley and J.P. Wikswo, “Scanning SQUID Microscopy”, Annual Review of Materials
Science, 29 (1999) 117-148.
[89] S. M. Frolov, M. J.A. Stoutimore, T. A. Crane, D. J. Van Harlingen, V. A. Oboznov, V. V.
Ryazanov, A. Ruosi, C. Granata, M.Russo, Imaging spontaneous currents in superconducting arrays
of π-junctions, Nature Phys., 4 (2008) 32.

126

[90] C.Granata, A.Vettoliere, R. Vaccarone, M. Russo, Low Critical Temperature dc-SQUIDs for
High Spatial Resolution Applications”, IEEE Trans. on Appl. Supercond., 17 (2007) 796-799.
[91] D. Cohen and E. Halgren, Magnetoencephalography, Encyclopedia of Neuroscience, 5 (2009)
615-622.
[92] K.Sternickel and A. I. Braginski “Biomagnetism using SQUIDs: status and perspectives”
Supercond. Sci. Technol., 19 (2006) 160-171.
[93]

M.

Hämäläinen,

R.

Hari,

R.

Ilmoniemi,

J.

Knuutila,

and

O.

Lounasmaa,

“Magnetoencephalography - theory, instrumentation, and applications to noninvasive studies of the
working human brain”, Rev. Mod. Phys., 65 (1993) 413-497.
[94] C. Del Gratta, V. Pizzella, F. Tecchio, and G. L. Romani., “Magnetoencephalography - a
noninvasive brain imaging method with 1 ms time resolution”, Rep. Prog. Phys., 64 (2001) 17591814.
[95] D. N. Paulson, R. M. Toussaint, R. L Fagaly, Superconducting magnetometer system for
detecting lung contaminants, IEEE Trans. Magn., 23 (1987) 1315–1318.
[96] B..M. Mackert, Magnetoneurography: theory and application to peripheral nerve disorders.,
Clin Neurophysiol., 115 (2004) 2667-2676
[97] G. M. Brittenham, D. E. Farrell, J. W. Harris, E. S. Feldman, E. H. Danish, W. A. Muir, J. H.
Tripp, E. M. Bellon., Magnetic-susceptibility of human iron stores, New Eng. J. Med., 307 (1982)
1671–1675,
[98] D. N. Paulson, R. L. Fagaly, R. M. Toussaint, and R. Fischer, Biomagnetic susceptometer with
SQUID instrumentation, IEEE Trans. Magn., 27 (1991) 3249–3252.
[99] R. Kotitz, H. Matz, L.Trahms, H. Koch, W. Weitschies, T. Rheinlander, W. Semmler, T.
Bunte, SQUID based remanence measurements for immunoassays, IEEE Trans. on Appl.
Supercond., 7 (1997) 3678-3681.
[100] W.G. Jenks, S. S. H. Sadeghi, J. P. Wikswo, SQUIDs for NDE, J. Phys. D, 30 (1997) 293–
323.
127

[101] G.B. Donaldson, The use of SQUIDs for NDE, in SQUID sensors: fundamentals, fabrication
and application, edited by H. Weinstock, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publisher, Series E: Applied
Sciences-Vol. 329 (1996), 599–628.
[102] J.R. Kirtley, Fundamental studies of superconductors using scanning magnetic imaging, Rep.
Prog. Phys., 73 (2010)126501.
[103] R. F. Voss, R. B. Laibowitz, M. B. Ketchen, A. N. Broers, 1980 Superconducting Quantum
Interference Devices and Their Application; Eds Hahlbohm H D and Luebbig H (de Gruyter, New
York) 365.
[104] M. B. Ketchen, D. D. Awschalom, W. J. Gallagher, A. W. Kleinsasser, R. L. Sandstrom, J. R.
Bozen, B. Bumble, Design, fabrication and performance of integrated miniature SQUID
susceptometer, IEEE Trans. Magn., 25 (1989)1212.
[105] J. Gallop, W. J. Radcliffe, An absolute magnetometer, IEEE Trans. Magn., 21 (1985) 602.
[106] W. Wernsdorfer Magnetometrie micro-SQUID pour l’etude de particules ferromagnetiques
isolees aux echelles sub-microniques, PhD Thesis Joseph Fourier University, Grenoble (1996).
[107] W. Wernsdorfer, Classical and quantum magnetization reversal studied in nanomete sized
particles and clusters, Adv. Chem. Phys., 118 (2001) 99.
[108] S. K. H. Lam, D. L. Tilbrook, Development of a niobium nanosuperconducting quantum
interference device for the detection of small spin populations, Appl. Phys. Lett., 82 (2003)
1078–1080.
[109] W. Wernsdorfer, D. Mailly, A. Benoit, Single nanoparticle measurement techniques, J. Appl.
Phys., 87 (2000) 5094.
[110] C. Granata, A. Vettoliere, P. Walke, C. Nappi, and M. Russo, Performance of nano
superconducting quantum interference devices for small spin cluster detection, J. Appl. Phys.,
106 (2009) 023925.

128

[111] M. Schmelz, R. Stolz, V. Zakosarenko, S. Anders, L. Fritzsch, H. Roth, H.G. Meyer, Highly
sensitive miniature SQUID magnetometer fabricated with cross-type Josephson tunnel junctions,
Physica C, 478 (2012) 77.
[112] P E Lindelof, Superconducting microbridges exhibiting Josephson properties, Rep. Prog.
Phys. 44, (1981) 60.
[113] P.W. Anderson and A. H. Dayem, Radio-Frequency Effects in Superconducting Thin Film
Bridges, Phys. Rev. Lett., 13 (1964) 195.
[114] T. Van Duzer and C. W. Turner, Principles of Superconductive Devices and Circuits, 2. ed.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall Inc., (1999).
[115] G. N. Gol’tsman, O. Okunev, G. Chulkova, A. Lipatov, A. Semenov, K. Smirnov, B.
Voronov, A. Dzardanov, C. Williams, and R. Sobolewski, Picosecond superconducting singlephoton optical detector, Appl. Phys. Lett., 79 (2001) 705.
[116] M. Ejrnaes, R .Cristiano, O. Quaranta, S. Pagano, A. Gaggero, F. Mattioli, R. Leoni, B.
Voronov, G. Gol’tsman, A cascade switching superconducting single photon detector, Appl. Phys.
Lett., 91 (2007) 262509.
[117] D. E. Prober, Superconducting terahertz mixer using a transition-edge microbolometer, Appl.
Phys. Lett., 62 (1993) 2119.
[118] J. E. Mooij and Y. V. Nazarov, Superconducting nanowires as quantum phase-slip junctions,
Nature Phys., 2 (2006) 169-172.
[119] K.K. Likharev, Superconducting weak links, Rev. Mod. Phys., 51 (1979) 101-158
[120] A. A. Golubov, M. Yu. Kupriyanov, E. Il’ichev, The current-phase relation in Josephson
junctions, Rev. Mod. Phys., 76 (2004) 411-469
[121] L.G. Aslamazov and A.I. Larkin, Josephson Effect in Superconducting Point Contacts, JETP
Lett., 9 (1969) 87-91
[122] K.K. Likharev and L.A. Yakobson, Steady state properties of superconducting bridges, Zh.
Tekhn. Fiz. 45, 1503 (1975) [Sov. Phys.Tech. Phys. 20, 950 (1975)]
129

[123] S.S. Pei, J.E. Lukens and R.D. Lukens, Measurement of the size dependence of the currentphase relation in microbridge Josephson junctions, Appl. Phys. Lett., 36 (1980) 88-90.
[124] K. Hasselbach, D. Mailly, J. R. Kirtley, Micro-superconducting quantum interference device
characteristics, J. Appl. Phys., 91 (2002) 4432.
[125] G. J. Podd, G. D. Hutchinson, D. A. Williams, and D. G. Hasko, Micro-SQUIDs with
controllable asymmetry via hot-phonon controlled junctions, Phys. Rev. B, 75 (2007) 134501.
[126] C. Granata, A. Vettoliere, M. Russo, B. Ruggiero, Noise theory of dc nano-SQUIDs based on
Dayem nanobridges, Phys. Rev. B, 84 (2011) 224516.
[127] W. J. Skocpol, M. R. Beasely, M. Tinkam, Self-heating hot spot in superconducting thin-film
microbridges, J. Appl. Phys., 45 (1974),4054-4066.
[128] I. O. Kulik, A. N. Omelyanchuk, Contribution to the microscopic theory of the Josephson
effect in superconducting bridges, Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz., 21 (1975) 216 [JETP Lett., 21
(1975) 96].
[129] K. D. Usadel, Generalized Diffusion Equation for Superconducting Alloys, Phys. Rev. Lett.
25, (1970) 507-509.
[130] L.P. Gor’kov, On the energy spectrum of superconductors, Zh. Eksp. Teor., 34 (1958) 735
[Sov. Phys. JETP, 7 505 (1958)].
[131]

L.P. Gor’kov, Theory of superconducting alloys in strong magnetic field near critical

temperature, Zh. Eksp. Teor., 37 (1959) 1407 [Sov. Phys. JETP, 10 998 (1960)].
[132] A. G. P. Troeman, S. H. W. van der Ploeg, E. Il’Ichev, H. G. Meyer, A. A. Golubov, M. Yu.
Kupriyanov, H. Hilgenkamp, Temperature dependence measurements of the supercurrent-phase
relationship in niobium nanobridges, Phys. Rev. B, 77 (2008) 024509.
[133] R. Vijay, J. D. Sau, Marvin L. Cohen, I. Siddiqi, Optimizing Anharmonicity in Nanoscale
Weak Link Josephson Junction Oscillators, Phys. Rev. Lett., 103 (2009) 087003.
[134] K. Hasselbach, C. Veauvy, D. Mailly, MicroSQUID magnetometry and magnetic imaging,
Physica C, 332 (2000) 140–147.
130

[135] J. Gallop , P.W. Josephs-Franks, J. Davies, L. Hao, J. Macfarlane, Miniature dc SQUID
devices for the detection of single atomic spin-flips, Physica C, 368 (2002) 109–113.
[136] J. C. Gallop, SQUIDs: Some limits to measurement, Supercond. Sci. Technol., (2003) 1575–
1582.
[137] P. Josephs-Franks, L. Hao, A. Tzalenchuk, J. Davies, O. Kazakova, J. C. Gallop, L. Brown, J.
C. Macfarlane, Measurement of the spatial sensitivity of miniature SQUIDs using magnetic-tipped
STM, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 16 (2003) 1570-1574.
[138] D. L. Tilbrook, NanoSQUID sensitivity for isolated dipoles and small spin populations,
Supercond. Sci. Technol., 22 (2009) 064003.
[139] V. Bouchiat, Detection of magnetic moments using a nano-SQUID: Limits of resolution
and sensitivity in near-field SQUID magnetometry, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 22 (2009) 064002.
[140] J. Nagel, K. B. Konovalenko, M. Kemmler, M. Turad , R. Werner, E. Kleisz, S. Menzel, R.
Klingeler, B. Buchner, R. Kleiner, D. Koelle, Resistively shunted YBa2Cu3O7 grain boundary
junctions and low-noise SQUIDs patterned by a focused ion beam down to 80 nm linewidth,
Supercond. Sci. Technol., 24 (2011) 015015.
[141]

R. Wölbing, T. Schwarz, B. Müller, J. Nagel, M. Kemmler, R. Kleiner, D. Koelle,

Optimizing the spin sensitivity of grain boundary junction nanoSQUIDs -towards detection of small
spin systems with single-spin resolution, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 27 (2014) 125007.
[142] J. R. Kirtley, M. B. Ketchen, K. G. Stawiasz, J. Z. Sun, W. J. Gallagher, S. H. Blanton and S.
J. Wind, High-resolution scanning SQUID microscope, Appl. Phys. Lett., 66 (1995) 1138-1140.
[143] S. Chatraphorn, E. F. Fleet and F. C. Wellstood, Relationship between spatial resolution and
noise in scanning superconducting quantum interference device microscopy, J. Appl. Phys., 92
(2002) 4731-4740.
[144] J. R. Bradley, G. S. Nestor and J. P. Wikswo Jr, Using a magnetometer to image a twodimensional current distribution, J. Appl. Phys., 65 (1989) 361–72.

131

[145] P. F. Vohralik and S. K. H. Lam, NanoSQUID detection of magnetization from ferritin
nanoparticles, 22 (2009) 064007.
[146] L. Hao, J. C. Macfarlane, J. C. Gallop, E. Romans, D. Cox, D. Hutson, and J. Chen, Spatial
Resolution Assessment of Nano-SQUIDs Made by Focused Ion Beam, IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond., 17 (2007) 742-745.
[147] E. H. Brandt, J.R. Clem, Superconducting thin rings with finite penetration depth, Phys. Rev.
B, 69 (2004) 184509.
[148] P. Zeeman and A. D. Fokker (eds), H. A. Lorentz Collected Papers (The Hague, Holland:
Martinus Nijhoff) vol III (1936) pp 1–11.
[149] M. A McCord, M. J. Rooks, Electron Beam Litography in SPIE Handbook of
Microlithography, Micromachining and Microfabrication: Vol. 1, Chapter 2, P. Rai-Choudhury
Editor, (2000) ISBN: 0-8194-2378-5, pp. 139-250
[150] H. D. Wanzenboeck, S. Waid, Focused Ion Beam Lithography in Recent Advances in
Nanofabrication Techniques and Applications, Chapter 2, Bo Cui Editor, (2011) ISBN: 978-953307-602-7, InTech, pp.27-50
[151] V. Bouchiat, M. Faucher C. Thirion and W. Wernsdorfer, T. Fournier and B. Pannetier,
Josephson junctions and superconducting quantum interference devices made by local oxidation of
niobium ultrathin films, Appl. Phys. Lett., 79 (2011) 123-125.
[152] M. Faucher, T. Fournier, B. Pannetier,, C. Thirion, W. Wernsdorfer, J.C. Villegier, V.
Bouchiat, Niobium and niobium nitride SQUIDs based on anodised nanobridges made with an
atomic force microscope, Physica C, 368 (2002) 211–217.
[153] S. K. H Lam, Noise properties of SQUIDs made from nanobridges, Supercond. Sci. Technol.,
19 (2006) 963–967.
[154] A. G. P. Troeman, H. Derking, B. Boerger, J. Pleikies, D. Veldhuis, and H. Hilgenkamp,
NanoSQUIDs based on niobium constrictions, Nano Lett., 7 (2007) 2152–2156.

132

[155] L. Hao, J. C. Macfarlane, J. C. Gallop, D. Cox, J. Beyer, D. Drung, and T. Schuring,
Measurement and noise performance of nano-superconducting-quantum interference devices
fabricated by focused ion beam, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 92 (2008) 192507–102509.
[156] L. Hao , D. C. Cox, J. C. Gallop, Characteristics of focused ion beam nanoscale Josephson
devices, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 22 (2009) 064011.
[157] L. Hao, D. C. Cox, J. C. Gallop, E. J. Romans, J. C. Macfarlane, and J. Chen, Focused Ion
Beam NanoSQUIDs as Novel NEMS Resonator Readouts, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 19
(2009) 693–696.
[158] E. J. Romans, S. Rozhko, L. Young, A. Blois, Ling Hao, D. Cox, John C. Gallop, Noise
Performance of Niobium Nano-SQUIDs in Applied Magnetic Fields, IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond., 21 (2011) 404-407.
[159] S. Rozhko, T. Hino, A. Blois, L. Hao, J. C. Gallop, D. C. Cox, and E. J. Romans, Study of
Low-Frequency Noise Performance of Nanobridge-Based SQUIDs in External Magnetic Fields,
IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 23 (2013) 1601004.
[160] T. Patel, B. Li, J. Gallop, D. Cox, K. Kirkby, E. Romans, J. Chen, A. Nisbet, L. Hao,
Investigating the Intrinsic Noise Limit of Dayem Bridge NanoSQUIDs, IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond., 25 (2015) 1602105.
[161] D. Drung, C. Aßmann, J. Beyer, A. Kirste, M. Peters, F. Ruede, and Th. Schurig, Higly
Sensitive and Easy-to-Use SQUID Sensors, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 17 (2007) 699-704.
[162] F. Ruede, S. Bechstein, L. Hao, C. Aßmann, T. Schurig, J. Gallop, O. Kazakova, J.Beyer, D.
Drung, Readout System for NanoSQUID Sensors Using a SQUID Amplifier, IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond., 21 (2011) 408-411.
[163] C. Granata, E. Esposito, A. Vettoliere, L. Petti, M. Russo, An integrated superconductive
magnetic nanosensor for high-sensitivity nanoscale applications,” Nanotechnology, 19 (2008)
275501–275506

133

[164] A.Vettoliere, C. Granata, E. Esposito, R. Russo, L. Petti, B. Ruggiero, M. Russo,
Performance of High-Sensitivity Nano-SQUIDs Based on Niobium Dayem Bridges, IEEE Trans.
Appl. Supercond., 19 (2009) 702-705.
[165] R. Vijay, E. M. Levenson-Falk, D. H. Slichter, I. Siddiqi, Approaching ideal weak link
behavior with three dimensional aluminum nanobridges, 96 (2010) 223112.
[166] N. Antler, E. M. Levenson-Falk, R. Naik,Y.-D. Sun, A. Narla, R. Vijay, I. Siddiqi, In-plane
magnetic field tolerance of a dispersive aluminum nanobridge SQUID magnetometer, Appl. Phys.
Lett., 102 (2013) 232602.
[167] E. M. Levenson-Falk, R. Vijay, N. Antler, I Siddiqi, A dispersive nanoSQUID magnetometer
for ultra-low noise, high bandwidth flux detection, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 26 (2013) 055015.
[168] M. Hatridge, R. Vijay, D. H. Slichter, J. Clarke, and I. Siddiqi, Phys. Rev. B, 83 (2011)
134501.
[169] S. K. H. Lam, J. R. Clem, and W. Yang, A nanoscale SQUID operating at high magnetic
fields, Nanotechnology, 22 (2011) 455501.
[170] L. Chen, W.Wernsdorfer, C. Lampropoulos, G. Christou, I. Chiorescu, On-chip SQUID
measurements in the presence of high magnetic fields, Nanotechnology, 21 (2010) 405504.
[171] C. Granata, A. Vettoliere, R. Russo, E. Esposito, M. Russo, and B. Ruggiero,
Supercurrent decay in nano-superconducting quantum interference devices for intrinsic magnetic
flux resolution, Appl. Phys. Lett., 94 (2009) 0625030.
[172] R. Russo, C. Granata, P. Walke, A. Vettoliere, E. Esposito, M. Russo, NanoSQUID as
magnetic sensor for magnetic nanoparticles Characterization, J. Nanopart. Res., 13, (2011) 5661–
5668.
[173] E. Esposito, C. Granata, A. Vettoliere, R. Russo, D. Peddis, M. Russo, Nano Superconducting
QUantum Interference Device Sensors for Magnetic Nanoparticle Detection, J. Nanosci.
Nanotechnol.,12 (2012) 7468-7472.

134

[174] R. Russo, C. Granata, E. Esposito, D. Peddis, C. Cannas, A. Vettoliere, “Nanoparticle
Magnetization Measurements by a High Sensitive Nano-Superconducting Quantum Interference
Device,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 101 (2012) 122601.
[175] E. Esposito, C. Granata, M. Russo, R. Russo, A. Vettoliere, High Sensitive Magnetic
Nanosensors Based on Superconducting Quantum Interference Device, IEEE Trans. Magn., 49
(2013) 140
[176] C. Granata, R. Russo, E. Esposito, A. Vettoliere, D. Peddis, A. Musinu, B. Ruggiero, Dino
Fiorani, M. Russo, Hysteretic NanoSQUID Sensors for Investigation of Iron Oxide Nanoparticles,
Trans. Appl. Supercond., 23 (2013) 1602305.
[177] J. Clarke, J. L. Paterson, Josephson-Junction Amplifier, Appl. Phys. Lett., 19 (1971) 469-471.
[178] D. Hazra, J. R. Kirtley, K. Hasselbach, Nano-superconducting quantum interference devices
with continuous read out at milliKelvin temperatures, Appl. Phys. Lett., 103 (2013) 093109.
[179] A. Blois, S. Rozhko, L. Hao, J. C. Gallop, and E. J. Romans, Proximity effect bilayer nano
superconducting quantum interference devices for millikelvin magnetometry, J. Appl. Phys., 114
(2013) 233907
[180] D. Hazra, J. R. Kirtley, K. Hasselbach, Nano-superconducting quantum interference devices
with suspended junctions, Appl. Phys. Lett., 104 (2014) 152603.
[181] S.-B. Lee, D. G. Hasko, H. Ahmed, Thermally switched superconducting weak-link transistor
with current gain, Appl. Phys. Lett., 76 (2000) 2295-2297.
[182] G. D. Hutchinson, H. Qin, D. G. Hasko, D. J. Kang, D. A. Williams, Controlled-junction
superconducting quantum interference device via phonon injection, Appl. Phys. Lett., 84 (2004)
136-138.
[183] G. J. Podd, G. D. Hutchinson, D. G. Hasko, D. A. Williams, Hot-Phonon Controlled
MicroSQUIDs With Independently Controlled Junctions, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 17 (2007)
710-713.

135

[184] G. C. Tettamanzi, C. I. Pakes, S. K. H. Lam, S. Prawer, Flux noise in ion-implanted
nanoSQUIDs, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 22 (2009) 064006.
[185] J. Nagel, O. F. Kieler, T. Weimann, R. Wolbing, J. Kohlmann, A. B. Zorin, R. Kleiner, D.
Koelle, M. Kemmler, Superconducting quantum interference devices with submicron Nb/HfTi/Nb
junctions for investigation of small magnetic particles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 99 (2011) 032506.
[186] D. Hagedorn, R. Dolata, F.-I. Buchholz, and J. Niemeyer, Properties of SNS Josephson
junctions with Hf Ti interlayers, Physica C, 372–376 (2002) 7-10
[187] D. Hagedorn, O. Kieler, R. Dolata, R. Behr, F. Muller, J. Kohlmann, J. Niemeyer, Modified
fabrication of planar sub-µm superconductor–normal metal–superconductor Josephson junctions for
use in a Josephson arbitrary waveform synthesizer, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 19 (2006) 294-298.
[188] R. Wölbing, J. Nagel, T. Schwarz, O. Kieler, T.J. Weimann, J. Kohlmann, A. B. Zorin, M.
Kemmler, R. Kleiner, D. Koelle, Nb nano superconducting quantum interference devices with high
spin sensitivity for operation in magnetic fields up to 0.5 T, Appl. Phys. Lett., 102 (2013) 192601.
[189] S. Bechstein, F. Ruede, D. Drung, J.-H. Storm, O. F. Kieler, J. Kohlmann, T. Weimann, T.
Schurig, HfTi-nanoSQUID gradiometers with high linearity, Appl. Phys. Lett., 106 (2015) 072601.
[190] C. Granata, A. Vettoliere, R. Russo, M. Fretto, N. De Leo, V. Lacquaniti, Threedimensional
spin nanosensor based on reliable tunnel Josephson nano-junctions for nanomagnetism
investigations, Appl. Phys. Lett., 103 (2013) 102602.
[191] C. Granata, A. Vettoliere, R. Russo, M. Fretto, N. De Leo, E. Enrico,V. Lacquaniti, Ultra
High Sensitive Niobium NanoSQUID by Focused Ion Beam Sculpting, J. Supercond. Nov. Magn.,
28 (2015) 585–589.
[192] C. Granata,, A. Vettoliere, M. Fretto, N. De Leo, V. Lacquaniti, Vertical nano
superconducting quantum interference device based on Josepshon tunnel nanojunctions for small
spin cluster detection, J. Magn. Magn. Mat., 384 (2015) 117–121.

136

[193] C. Granata, A. Vettoliere, B. Ruggiero, M.o Russo, M. Fretto, V. Lacquaniti, L. Boarino, N.
De Leo, Low Noise NanoSQUIDs Based on Deep Submicron Josephson Tunnel Junctions, IEEE
Trans. Appl. Supercond., 25 (2015) 1600905.
[194] R. Russo, C. Granata, A. Vettoliere, E. Esposito, M. Fretto, N. De Leo, E. Enrico,V.
Lacquaniti, Performances of niobium planar nanointerferometers as a function of the temperature: a
comparative study, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 27 (2014) 044028.
[195] A. Ronzani, M. Baillergeau, C. Altimiras, and F. Giazotto, Micro-superconducting quantum
interference devices based on V/Cu/V Josephson nanojunctions, Appl. Phys. Lett., 103 (2013)
052603.
[196] A.Ronzani, C. Altimiras, F. Giazotto, Balanced double-loop mesoscopic interferometer based
on Josephson proximity nanojunctions, Appl. Phys. Lett., 104 (2014) 032601.
[197] M. Schmelz, Y. Matsui, R. Stolz, V. Zakosarenko, T. Schönau, S. Anders, S. Linzen, H.
Itozaki, H-G Meyer, Investigation of all niobium nano-SQUIDs based on sub-micrometer crosstype Josephson junctions, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 28 (2015) 015004
[198] S. Anders, M. Schmelz, L. Fritzsch, R. Stolz, V. Zakosarenko, T. Schönau, H. G. Meyer,
Supercond. Sci. Technol., 22 (2009) 064012.
[199] R. Ishiguro et al., Development of nano and micro SQUIDs based on Al tunnel junctions,
Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 568 (2014) 022019.
[200] N. C. Koshnick, M. E. Huber, J. A. Bert, C. W. Hicks, J. Large, H. Edwards, K. A. Moler, A
terraced scanning superconducting quantum interference device susceptometer with submicron
pickup loops, Appl. Phys. Lett., 93 (2008) 243101.
[201] N. Watanabe, Y.Miyato, S. Matsusawa, M. Tachiki, T. Hayashi, H. Itozaki, Fine probe for an
STM-SQUID probe microscope, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 23 (2013) 1601804.
[202] D. Drung, J.H. Storm, F. Ruede, A. Kirste, M. Regin, T. Schurig, A. M. Repollés, J. Sesé, F.
Luis, Thin-Film microsusceptometer with integrated nanoloop, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 24
(2014) 1600206.
137

[203] E. J. Romans, E. J. Osley, L. Young, P. A. Warburton, W. Li, Three-dimensional nanoscale
superconducting quantum interference device pickup loops, Appl. Phys. Lett., 97 (2010) 222506.
[204] W. Li and P. A. Warburton, Low-current focused-ion-beam induced deposition of threedimensional tungsten nanoscale conductors, Nanotechnology 18, (2007) 485305.
[205] A. Finkler, Y. Segev, Y. Myasoedov, M. L. Rappaport, L. Ne’eman, D. Vasyukov, E. Zeldov,
M. E. Huber, J. Martin, A. Yacoby, Self-aligned nanoscale SQUID on a tip, Nano Lett., 10 (2010)
1046–1049.
[206] A. Finkler, D. Vasyukov, Y. Segev, L. Ne'eman, E. O. Lachman, M. L. Rappaport, Y.
Myasoedov, E. Zeldov, M. E. Huber, Scanning superconducting quantum interference device on a
tip for magnetic imaging of nanoscale phenomena, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 83 (2012) 073702
[207] D. Vasyukov, et al., A scanning superconducting quantum interference device with single
electron spin sensitivity, Nat. Nanotech. 8 (2013) 639–644.
[208] C. H. Wu, Y. T. Chou, W. C. Kuo, J. H. Chen, L. M. Wang, J. C. Chen, K. L. Chen, U. C.
Sou, H. C. Yang, J. T. Jeng, Fabrication and Characterization of High-Tc YBa2Cu3O7-x
NanoSQUIDs Made by Focused Ion Beam Milling, Nanotechnology, 19 (2008) 315304.
[209] T. Schwarz, J. Nagel, R. Wolbing, M. Kemmler, R. Kleiner, and D. Koelle, Low-Noise Nano
Superconducting Quantum Interference Device Operating in Tesla Magnetic Fields, ACS nano, 7
(2013) 844–850.
[210] R. Arpaia, M. Arzeo, S. Nawaz, S. Charpentier, F. Lombardi, T. Bauch, Ultra low noise
YBa2Cu3O7 − δ nano superconducting quantum interference devices implementing nanowires, App.
Phys. Lett., 104 (2014) 072603.
[211] M. Aprili, The nanoSQUID makes its debut, Nature Nanotech., 1 (2006) 15-16.
[212] J.-P.

Cleuziou,

W. Wernsdorfer, V. Bouchiat, T. Ondarcuhu, M. Monthioux, Carbon

nanotube superconducting quantum interference device, Nature Nanotech., 1 (2006) 53–59.
[213] A. Y. Kasumov et al., Supercurrents through single-walled carbon nanotube,. Science 397,
(1999) 598–601.
138

[214] C. Girit, V. Bouchiat, O. Naaman, Y. Zhang, M. F. Crommie, A. Zettl, I. Siddiqi, Tunable
Graphene dc Superconducting Quantum Interference Device, ACS nano, 9 (2009) 198-199.
[215] H. B. Heersche, P. Jarillo-Herrero, J. B. Oostinga, L. M. K. Vandersypen, A. F. Morpurgo,
Bipolar supercurrent in graphene, Nature, 486 (2007) 56-59
[216] X. Du, I. Skachko, E. Y. Andrei, Josephson current and multiple Andreev reflections in
graphene SNS junctions, Phys. Rev. B, 77 (2008) 184507.
[217] A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov, The rise of graphene, Nat. Mater., 6 (2007) 183.
[218] S. Mandal, T. Bautze, O. A. Williams, C . Naud, E. Bustarret, F. Omnes, P. Rodiere, T.
Meunier, C. Bauerle, L. Saminadayar, The Diamond Superconducting Quantum Interference
Device, ACS nano, 5 (2011) 7144–7148.
[219] E. A. Ekimov, A. A. Sidorov, E. D. Bauer, N. N. Melnik, N. J. Curro, J. D. Thompson, S. M.
Stishov, Superconductivity in Diamond, Nature, 428 (2004) 542 – 545.
[220] X. Blase, E. Bustarret, C. Chapelier, T. Klein, C. Marcenat, Superconducting Group-IV
Semiconductors., Nat. Mater., 8 (2009) 375 – 382.
[221] P. Spathis, S. Biswas, S. Roddaro, L. Sorba, F. Giazotto, F. Beltram, Hybrid InAs nanowire–
vanadium proximity SQUID, Nanotechnology 22 (2011) 105201.
[222] R. M. Lutchyn, J. D. Sau, S. Das Sarma, Majorana fermions and a topological phase
transition in semiconductor–superconductor heterostructures, Phys. Rev. Lett., 105 (2010) 077001.
[223] J. Nakamatsu, N. Nakagawa, T. Muranaka, Y. Zenitani, J. Akimitsu, Superconductivity at 39
K in magnesium diboride, Nature, 410 (2001) 63-64
[224] A. Brinkman J.M. Rowell, MgB 2 tunnel junctions and SQUIDs, Physica C, 456 (2007) 188–
195
[225] Y. Harada, K. Kobayashi, M. Yoshizawa, MgB2 SQUID for Magnetocardiography, in
Superconductors - Properties, Technology, and Applications, edited by Y. Grigorashvili, (Publisher
InTech, 2012), 389-404.
[226] S.-G. Lee, S.-H. Hong, W. K. Seong, W. N. Kang, All focused ion beam fabricated MgB2
139

inter-grain nanobridge dc SQUIDs, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 22 (2009) 064009
[227] S.-H. Hong, S.-G. Lee, W. K. Seong, W. N. Kang, Fabrication of MgB2 nanobridge dc
SQUIDs by focused ion beam, Physica C, 470 (2010) S1036–S1037.
[228] B. Ruggiero, C. Granata, V.G. Palmieri, A. Esposito, M. Russo, P Silvestrini, Supercurrent
decay in extremely underdamped Josephson junctions, Phys. Rev. B, 57 (1998) 134-137
[229] P. Silvestrini, B. Ruggiero, C. Granata, E. Esposito, Supercurrent decay of Josephson
junctions in non-stationary conditions: experimental evidence of macroscopic quantum effects,
Phys. Lett. A, 267 (2000) 45-51
[230] W. Wernsdorfer, D. Mailly, A. Benoit, Single nanoparticle measurement techniques J. Appl.
Phys., 87 (2000) 5094.
[231] W .Wernsdorfer, E. Bonet Orozco, K. Hasselbach, A. Benoit, D. Mailly, O. Kubo, H.
Nakano, B. Barbara, Macroscopic quantum tunneling of magnetization of single ferrimagnetic
nanoparticles of barium ferrite, Phys. Rev. Lett., 79 (1997) 4014
[232] C. Granata, R. Russo, E. Esposito, A. Vettoliere, M. Russo, A. Musinu, D. Peddis, D. Fiorani,
Magnetic properties of iron oxide nanoparticles investigated by nanoSQUIDs, Eur. Phys. J. B, 86
(2013) 272.
[234] L. Bogani, C. Danieli, E. Biavardi, N. Bendiab, A. L. Barra, E. Dalcanale, W. Wernsdorfer,
A. Cornia. Single-molecule-magnet carbon-nanotube hybrids, Angew. Chem. Int. Edn Engl., 48
(2009) 746.
[235] L. Hao, C.A. ßmann, J.C. Gallop, D. Cox, F. Ruede, O. Kazakova, P. Josephs-Franks, D.
Drung, Th Schurig, Detection of single magnetic nanobead with a nano-superconducting quantum
interference device, Appl. Phys. Lett., 98 (2011) 092504.
[236] L. Hao, D. Cox, P. See, J. Gallop, O Kazakova, Magnetic nanoparticle detection using nanoSQUID sensors, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 43 (2010) 474004.

140

[237] M. Faucher, P. O. Jubert, O. Fruchart, W. Wernsdorfer, V. Bouchiat, Optimizing the flux
coupling between a nanoSQUID and a magnetic particle using atomic force microscope
nanolithography, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 22 (2009) 064010.
[238] M. Martin, L. Roschier, P. Hakonen, U. Parts, M. Paalanen, B. Schleicher, and E. I.
Kauppinen, Manipulation of Ag nanoparticles utilizing noncontact atomic force microscopy, Appl.
Phys. Lett., 73 (1998) 1505.
[239] D. M. Schaefer, R. Reifenberger, A. Patil, and R. P. Andres, Fabrication of two dimensional
arrays of nanometer size clusters with the atomic force microscope, Appl. Phys. Lett., 66 (1995)
1012.
[240] M. Jamet, W. Wernsdorfer, C. Thirion, D. Mailly, V. Dupuis, P. Melinon, A. Perez 2001
Magnetic anisotropy of individual cobalt clusters, Phys. Rev. Lett., 86 (2001) 4676.
[241] M. Jamet, W. Wernsdorfer, C. Thirion, V. Dupuis, P. Melinon, A. Perez, D. Mailly Magnetic
anisotropy in single clusters, Phys. Rev. B, 69 (2004) 024401
[242] S. K. H. Lam, Wenrong Yang, H. T. R. Wiogo, C. P. Foley, Attachment of magnetic
molecules on a nanoSQUID, Nanotechnology, 19 (2008) 285303.
[243] L. Neel, Theorie du trainage magnétique des ferromagnetiques en grains fins avec application
aux terres cuites, Ann. Geophys., 5 (1949) 99-136.
[244] I. Volkov, M. Chukharkin, O. Snigirev, A. Volkov, S. Tanaka, and C. Fourie, Determination
of the anisotropy constant and saturation magnetization of magnetic nanoparticles from
magnetization relaxation curves, J. Nanopart. Res., 10 (2008) 487-497
[245] N. L. Adolphi, et al., Characterization of single-core magnetite nanoparticles for magnetic
imaging by SQUID relaxometry, Phys. Med. Biol., 55 (2010) 5985-6003.
[246] E. C. Stoner, E. P., Wohlfarth, A mechanism of magnetic hysteresis in heterogeneous
allows., Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond., A 240 (1948) 599–608.
[247] J. Clarke, A. N. Cleland, M. H. Devoret, D. Esteve, J. M. Martinis, Quantum mechanics of a
macroscopic variable: the phase difference of a Josephson junction, Science 239 (1988) 992
141

[248] B. Ruggiero, V. Corato, C. Granata, L. Longobardi, S. Rombetto, Measurement of the
effective dissipation in an rf SQUID system, Phys. Rev. B, 67 (2003) 132504.
[249] W. Wernsdorfer, K. Hasselbach, D. Mailly, B. Barbara , A. Benoit, L. Thomas, G. Swan,
DC-SQUID magnetization measurements of single magnetic particles, J. Magn. Magn. Mat.,
145 (1995) 33-39.
[250] W. Wernsdorfer et al, High sensitivity magnetization measurements of nanoscale cobalt
clusters, J. Appl. Phys., 78 (1995) 7192.
[251] W. Wernsdorfer, B. Doudin, D. Mailly, K. Hasselbach, A. Benoit, J. Meier, J.-Ph. Ansermet,
B. Barbara, Nucleation of Magnetization Reversal in Individual Nanosized Nickel Wires, Phys.
Rev. Lett., 77 (1996) 1873.
[252] W. Wernsdorfer et al, Experimental Evidence of the Néel-Brown Model of Magnetization
Reversal, Phys. Rev. Lett., 78 (1997) 1791.
[253] W. F. Brown, Thermal Fluctuations of a Single-Domain Particle, Phys. Rev., 130 (1963)
1677.
[254] W. Wernsdorfer et al, Macroscopic Quantum Tunneling of Magnetization of Single
Ferrimagnetic Nanoparticles of Barium Ferrite, Phys. Rev. Lett., 79 (1997) 4014.
[255] E. Bonet et al., Three-Dimensional Magnetization Reversal Measurements in Nanoparticles,
Phys. Rev. Lett., 83 (1999) 4188.
[256] C. Thirion, W. Wernsdorfer, D. Mailly, Switching of magnetization by nonlinear resonance
studied in single nanoparticles, Nat. Mater., 2 (2003) 524-527
[257] W. Wernsdorfer, R. Sessoli, Quantum phase interference and parity effects in magnetic
molecular clusters, Science, 284 (1999) 133
[258] O. Fruchart, J-P. Nozieres, W. Wernsdorfer, D. Givord, Enhanced coercivity in
submicrometer-sized ultrathin epitaxial dots with in-plane magnetization, Phys. Rev. Lett., 82
(1999) 1305.

142

[259] M. J. Martınez-Perez, Alternating current magnetic susceptibility of a molecular magnet
submonolayer directly patterned onto a micro superconducting quantum interference device, Appl.
Phys. Lett., 99 (2011) 032504
[260] R. D. Piner, J. Zhu, F. Xu, S. Hong, C. A. Mirkin, "Dip-Pen" nanolithography, Science, 283
(1999), 661-663
[261] T. Schwarz et al, Low-Noise YBa2Cu3O7 NanoSQUIDs for Performing MagnetizationReversal Measurements on Magnetic Nanoparticles, arXiv:1503.06090v1 (2015).
[262] E. F. Fleet, S. Chatraphorn, F. C. Wellstood, C. Eylem, "Determination

of magnetic

properties using a scanning SQUID microscope", IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 11, (2011)
1180 – 1183.
[263] S. Bechstein, A. Kirste, D. Drung, M. Regin, O. Kazakova, J. Gallop, L. Hao, D. Cox, and T.
Schurig, Investigation of Material effects with micro-sized SQUID sensors, IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond., 23 (2013) 1602004.
[264] T. Shuring, Making SQUIDs a practical tool for quantum detection and material
characterization in the micro- and nanoscale, Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 568 (2014)
032015
[265] J. Nagel et al., Nanoscale multifunctional sensor formed by a Ni nanotube and a scanning Nb
nanoSQUID, Phys. Rev. B, 88 (2013) 064425.
[266] S. Etaki, M. Poot, I. Mahboob, K. Onomitsu, H. Yamaguchi, H. S. J. van der Zant, Motion
detection of a micromechanical resonator embedded in a d.c. SQUID, Nat. Phys., 4 (2008) 785-788.
[267] S. Pugnetti, Y. M. Blanter, and R. Fazio, Resonant coupling of a SQUID to a mechanical
resonator, Euro. Phys. Lett., 90 (2010) 48007.
[268]C. Ke, H. D. Espinosa “Nanoelectromechanical Systems and Modeling”, in Handbook of
Theoretical and Computational Nanotechnology, Edited by Michael Rieth and Wolfram Schommers
Volume 1, (2005) 1–38.

143

[269] L. Hao, D. C. Cox, J. C. Gallop, J. Chen, Member, IEEE, S. Rozhko, A. Blois, E. J. Romans,
Coupled, NanoSQUIDs and Nano-Electromechanical Systems (NEMS) Resonators, IEEE trans.
Appl. Supercond., 23 (2013) 1800304
[270] S. Bechstein, et al., Design and fabrication of coupled nanoSQUIDs and NEMS, IEEE Trans.
Appl. Supercond., 25 (2015) 1602604.
[271] L. Hao, J. C. Gallop, D.C. Cox, J. Chen, Fabrication and Analogue Applications of
NanoSQUIDs Using Dayem Bridge Junctions, EEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 21 (2015)
9100108.
[272] G. C. Hilton, J. M. Martinis, K. D. Irwin, N. F. Bergren, D. A. Wollman, M. E. Huber, S.
Deiker, S. W. Nam, Microfabricated transition-edge X-ray detectors, IEEE Trans. Appl.
Supercond., 11 (2001) 739–42.
[273] A. J. Kreisler, A. Gaugue, Recent progress in high-temperature superconductor bolometric
detectors: from the mid-infrared to the far-infrared (THz) range, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 13
(2000) 1235–1245.
[274] L. Hao, J. C. Gallop, C. Gardiner, P. Josephs-Franks, J. C. Macfarlane, S. K. H. Lam, C.
Foley, Inductive superconducting transition-edge detector for single-photon and macro-molecule
detection, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 16 (2003) 1479–1482.
[275] L. Hao, J. C. Macfarlane, P. Josephs-Franks, J. C. Gallop, Inductive Superconducting
Transition-Edge Photon and Particle Detector, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 13 (2003) 622-625
[276] A. Watson, Measurement and the Single Particle, Science, 306 (2004) 1308-1309.
[277] L. Hao, J. C. Macfarlane, S. K. H. Lam, C. P Foley, P. Josephs-Franks, and J. C. Gallop,
Inductive Sensor Based on Nano-Scale SQUIDs, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 15 (2005) 514517.
[278] J. Tejada, E. M. Chudnovsky , E. del Barco, J. M. Hernandez, T. P. Spiller, Magnetic qubits
as hardware for quantum computers, Nanotechnology ,12 (2001) 181–186.

144

[279] S. K. H. Lam, Flux transistor made from a single-layer niobium thin-film superconducting
quantum interference device, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 19 (2006) 27–31.
[280] S. K. H. Lam, S. Gnanarajan, Hysteretic behaviour of nanoSQUIDs-prospective application
as trapped-vortex memory, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 22 (2009) 064005.
[281] A. F. Hebard, A, T, Fiory, A memory device utilizing the storage of Abrikosov vortices at an
array of pinning sites in a superconducting film, AIP Conf. Proc., 44 (1978) 465.
[282] S. Uehara, K. Nagata, Trapped vortex memory cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 39 (1981) 992.
[283] J. Nygard, D. H. Cobden, P. E.Lindelof, Kondo physics in carbon nanotubes, Nature, 408
(2000) 342–346.
[284] C. Bena, S. Vishveshwara, L. Balents, M. P. A. Fisher, Quantum entanglement in carbon
nanotubes. Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 037901 (2002).

145

