Nanoscale thermal imaging of dissipation in quantum systems
D. Halbertal1, J. Cuppens1,2, M. Ben Shalom3, L. Embon1,†, N. Shadmi4, Y. Anahory1,
HR Naren1, J. Sarkar1, A. Uri1, Y. Ronen1, Y. Myasoedov1, L. S. Levitov5, E. Joselevich4,
A. K. Geim3 and E. Zeldov1
Energy dissipation is a fundamental process governing the dynamics of physical,
chemical, and biological systems. It is also one of the main characteristics
distinguishing quantum and classical phenomena. In condensed matter physics, in
particular, scattering mechanisms, loss of quantum information, or breakdown of
topological protection are deeply rooted in the intricate details of how and where the
dissipation occurs. Despite its vital importance the microscopic behavior of a system
is usually not formulated in terms of dissipation because the latter is not a readily
measureable quantity on the microscale. Although nanoscale thermometry is
gaining much recent interest‎1-‎15, the existing thermal imaging methods lack the
necessary sensitivity and are unsuitable for low temperature operation required for
study of quantum systems. Here we report a superconducting quantum interference
nano-thermometer device with sub 50 nm diameter that resides at the apex of a
sharp pipette and provides scanning cryogenic thermal sensing with four orders of
magnitude improved thermal sensitivity of below 1 µK/Hz1/2. The non-contact
non-invasive thermometry allows thermal imaging of very low nanoscale energy
dissipation down to the fundamental Landauer limit ‎16-‎18 of 40 fW for continuous
readout of a single qubit at 1 GHz at 4.2 K. These advances enable observation of
dissipation due to single electron charging of individual quantum dots in carbon
nanotubes and reveal a novel dissipation mechanism due to resonant localized states
in hBN encapsulated graphene, opening the door to direct imaging of nanoscale
dissipation processes in quantum matter.

1

Department of Condensed Matter Physics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001,
Israel.
2
Catalan Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (ICN2), CSIC and the Barcelona Institute
of Science and Technology, Campus UAB, Bellaterra, 08193 Barcelona, Spain.
3
National Graphene Institute, The University of Manchester, Booth St. E, Manchester M13 9PL,
UK and the School of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Manchester, Manchester M13
9PL, UK.
4
Department of Materials and Interfaces, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 7610001,
Israel.
5
Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02139, USA.
†
Present address: Department of Physics, Columbia University, New York, New York 10027,
USA.
1

Investigation of energy dissipation on the nanoscale is of major fundamental interest
for a wide range of disciplines from biological processes, through chemical reactions, to
energy-efficient computing‎1-‎5. Study of dissipation mechanisms in quantum systems is of
particular importance because dissipation demolishes quantum information. In order to
preserve a quantum state the dissipation has to be extremely weak and hence hard to
measure. As a figure of merit for detection of low power dissipation in quantum
systems‎16 we consider an ideal qubit operating at a typical readout frequency of 1 GHz.
Landauer's principle states the lowest bound on energy dissipation in an irreversible qubit
operation to be 𝐸0 = 𝑘B 𝑇 ln 2, where 𝑘B is Boltzmann’s constant and 𝑇 is the
temperature‎17,‎18. At 𝑇 = 4.2 K, 𝐸0 = 410-23 J, several orders of magnitude below 10-19 J
of dissipation per logical operation in present day superconducting electronics and 10 -15 J
in CMOS devices‎19,‎20. Hence the power dissipated by an ideal qubit operating at a
readout rate of 𝑓 = 1 GHz will be as low as 𝑃 = 𝐸0 𝑓 = 40.2 fW. The resulting
temperature increase of the qubit will depend on its size and the thermal properties of the
substrate. For example, a 120 × 120 nm2 device on a 1 µm thick SiO2/Si substrate
dissipating 40 fW will heat up by about 3 µK (Fig. 1). Such signals are several orders of
magnitude below the best sensitivity of several mK⁄Hz 1⁄2 of any of the existing imaging
techniques‎1-‎15 (Fig. 1a) including radiation-based thermometry utilizing infra-red‎6,
fluorescence in nanodiamonds‎4,‎7,‎8, Raman‎9, or transmission electron beam‎5, and atomic
force microscopy (AFM) outfitted with thermocouple or resistive thermometers ‎10-‎15.
Moreover, none of the existing imaging techniques was demonstrated to operate at
sufficiently low temperatures that are essential for study of quantum systems.
Superconducting junctions are commonly used as highly sensitive thermometers ‎2,21
‎ ,
relying on the strong temperature dependence of their critical current 𝐼𝑐 (𝑇), which in the
vicinity of the critical temperature 𝑇𝑐 can be approximated by 𝐼𝑐 (𝑇) ≅ 𝐼0 (1 − 𝑇⁄𝑇𝑐 ).
Conventional junction configurations, however, are not suitable for scanning probe
thermometry due to their planar geometry and strong thermal coupling to the substrate.
Here we introduce a non-contact cryogenic scanning probe microscopy technique based
on the superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) positioned on a tip‎22,‎23. We
utilize a novel approach in which a single Pb (𝑇𝑐 = 7.2 K) superconducting junction or a
SQUID is fabricated on the apex of a sharp quartz pipette (SQUID-on-tip (SOT)) which
can be made as small as a few tens of nm in diameter (Supplementary Information S1).
Figure 1b shows a scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of such a SOT thermometer
(tSOT) with an effective diameter of 46 nm, as determined from its quantum interference
pattern. Similar SOT devices have previously been reported‎22,‎23 to be extremely sensitive
magnetic sensors reaching magnetic spin sensitivity below 0.4 μB ⁄Hz 1⁄2 . The electrical
characteristics of the tSOT (Fig. 1c) show the current through the sensor 𝐼𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 vs.

2

Size [nm]
10 1

10 2

10 3

150

b

plasmon TEM

IR

10 0

c

gap

10 0

Ic (4.2K)
100

ItSOT [µA]

a

Pb Pb

SNOM
10 -1

10 -1

50

Raman

TC SThM

Ic (6K)

10 -2

-3

10

7

120

180

50 nm
0
0
10-1

d

60

Ibias [µA]

e

tSOT

10 -5

He
gas

Rss

10 -5

tSOT

-6

10

1

10
10

2

10

-6

[K]

10 -4

10-3

ac

10 -4

10

-3

T [K]
5 6

T

10

nanodiamond

4

10 -2
T [K]

Sensitivity [K/Hz 1/2]

Res. SThM

device

Rsd

SiO2/Si

Rdb

Ts

10-5

Td

10-7
10-16 10-14 10-12 10-10

3

P [W]

Spatial resolution [nm]

Figure 1 | tSOT characteristics and performance. a, Sensitivities of different thermal
imaging techniques (blue) and of the tSOT (red) vs. their spatial resolution (bottom-left
axes). Green diamond: the measured temperature increase due to 40 fW dissipation
(taken from (e)) corresponding to Landauer’s limit for qubit operation at 4.2 K at 1 GHz
along with the theoretical scaling of the temperature with the qubit size (dashed line, topright axes). b, SEM image of the 46 nm effective diameter Pb tSOT. c, Electrical
characteristics of the tSOT for temperatures ranging from 4.2 K to 7.2 K with marked
values of the critical current 𝐼𝑐 at representative temperatures. d, Schematic drawing of
the measurement setup and a simplified effective thermal circuit. e, Measurement of the
tSOT temperature 𝑇𝑎𝑐 at 13.1 kHz above a 120 nm wide Cu nanowire with sheet
resistance 0.46 /□ vs. the ac power 𝑃 dissipated by a variable 𝐼𝑎𝑐 in 120120 nm2 unit
segment of the nanowire. The dashed line shows a linear fit (with slope 𝑅𝑑𝑏 = 6.8107
K/W) and a noise floor of 𝑇𝑎𝑐 ≃ 440 nK below 𝑃 ≃ 6 fW using lock-in amplifier time
constant of 1 sec.

3

externally applied bias current 𝐼𝑏𝑖𝑎𝑠 at various temperatures (see electrical diagram in Fig.
S1c). For 𝐼𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 < 𝐼𝑐 essentially all the applied current flows through the tSOT while at
higher bias a substantial part of the current diverts to a parallel shunt resistor. When
biasing the tSOT at 𝐼𝑏𝑖𝑎𝑠 > 𝐼𝑐 (dashed line in Fig. 1c), the temperature dependence of
𝐼𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑇) gives rise to a thermal response 𝑑𝐼𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 ⁄𝑑𝑇 = − 9.5 μA/K (Fig. S1b), which
1/2
combined with the very low white noise of 𝑆𝐼 = 8.3 pA⁄Hz 1⁄2 of the tSOT (Fig. S1c)
1/2
translates into a remarkably low thermal noise of 𝑆𝑇 = 870 nK⁄Hz 1⁄2 , a four orders of
magnitude improvement over the existing thermal imaging methods (Fig. 1a).
To enable effective thermal imaging, the thermal properties of the sensor, including
its coupling to the sample, are crucial. For non-invasive imaging, the thermal resistance
between the sensor and the investigated device, 𝑅𝑠𝑑 , has to be significantly larger than
the thermal resistance of the device to the bulk of its substrate, 𝑅𝑑𝑏 (Fig. 1d). On the
other hand, in order for the temperature of the sensor 𝑇𝑠 to accurately describe the local
temperature of the device 𝑇𝑑 , a high thermal resistance 𝑅𝑠𝑠 is required between the sensor
and its support structure. The resulting overall requirement of 𝑅𝑠𝑠 ≫ 𝑅𝑠𝑑 ≫ 𝑅𝑑𝑏 is
usually hard to achieve in AFM-type scanning thermal probes‎12, leading to invasive
in-contact imaging‎13-‎14. In tSOT, in contrast, 𝑅𝑠𝑠 is extremely high, owing to its unique
nanoscale cross-section geometry, giving rise to a quantum-limited phonon thermal
conductivity‎24, and to the absence of electronic heat conductivity along the
superconducting leads. As a result, our smaller tSOT attains 𝑅𝑠𝑠 ~1011 K⁄W (see S6) as
compared to 𝑅𝑑𝑏 ~107 K⁄W for a 120120 nm2 device on a SiO2/Si substrate at 4.2 K
(Fig. 1e). The corresponding optimal 𝑅𝑠𝑑 of 108 to 1010 K⁄W is readily achieved in our
configuration using a few mbar of He exchange gas to tune 𝑅𝑠𝑑 (Fig. S8). These features
permit non-contact sensing of the local temperature 𝑇𝑑 of the sample with nanoscale
resolution (Fig. S2 and sections S3-4).
To characterize the thermal sensitivity of the scanning tSOT we position the sensor
above a 120 nm wide Cu nanowire on SiO2/Si substrate (Figs. 1d and S7) carrying an ac
current which results in an ac temperature modulation 𝑇𝑎𝑐 of the nanowire at 13.1 kHz.
By changing the current amplitude we measured tSOT 𝑇𝑎𝑐 vs. the power 𝑃 dissipated per
square 120120 nm2 segment of the wire (Fig. 1e). Since 𝑇𝑎𝑐 ≪ 𝑇𝑏 , where 𝑇𝑏 = 4.2 K is
the thermal bath temperature, the measurement is in the small signal limit and hence 𝑇𝑎𝑐
is linear in 𝑃 as expected, reaching a noise level of 𝑇𝑎𝑐 ≃ 440 nK at 𝑃 ≃ 6 fW. The green
symbol in Fig. 1e points to the Landauer’s dissipation limit of 𝑃 = 40.2 fW of a qubit
operating at 1 GHz at 4.2 K which gives rise to 𝑇𝑎𝑐 = 2.6 µK in our sample. This value is
demarcated in Fig. 1a (green) along with the expected inverse scaling of the qubit
temperature with its area (dashed line).

4

By applying a proper combination of magnetic field and bias, the tSOT can be tuned
to have both magnetic field and thermal sensitivities. Since the Oersted field generated by
the transport current in the sample is linear in current while the dissipation is quadratic,
the resulting magnetic field signal 𝐵𝑧𝑎𝑐 generated by the ac current 𝐼𝑎𝑐 at frequency 𝑓 can
be imaged simultaneously with the thermal signal 𝑇𝑎𝑐 that will be present at frequency 2𝑓
as shown in Fig. S11.
We employed the tSOT technique for nanoscale thermal imaging of quantum matter.
Figures 2a,b show 𝑇𝑎𝑐 images of two single-wall carbon nanotubes (CNT) carrying an ac
current of few nA. Each CNT is wound into a loop‎25 as outlined by the dotted trajectories
and shown by SEM images in Figs. 2d,e. The thermal signal in Fig. 2a tracks the CNT,
revealing the current-driven dissipation along the entire CNT length. Surprisingly, and in
contrast to the above, Fig. 2b shows an absence of heating in the circular part of the loop.
The 𝑇𝑎𝑐 image thus reveals that the applied current bypasses the loop exposing an
electrically shorted junction between the two crossing sections of the CNT. This
observation illustrates the capacity of tSOT for fault detection in operating nano-devices.
A striking feature evident in Figs. 2a,b is ring-like fine structures, with a zoomed-in
𝑇𝑎𝑐 image of one of them shown in Fig. 2c. These features resemble the Coulomb
blockade rings observed in scanning gate microscopy‎26 in which the conductance through
a quantum dot (QD) is measured as a function of the position of a conducting AFM tip. In
this case, the characteristic equipotential rings corresponding to the periodic conditions of
Coulomb blockade peaks governed by single electron charging of the QD‎27 originate
from the tip acting as a local gate. Since the tSOT is conducting, it can also serve as a
nanoscale scanning gate. Our long CNTs on the SiO2/Si substrate are, however, highly
disordered, with numerous QDs in series resulting in CNT resistances in excess of 10
M. As a result, no detectable change in the CNT conductance is observed while
scanning the tSOT. The unique feature of the tSOT, however, is that in addition to
functioning as a scanning gate it simultaneously operates as a nanoscale thermometer that
detects minute changes in the local dissipation resulting from its own controllable local
gating. The 𝑇𝑎𝑐 ring in Fig. 2c with a cross sectional width of 20 nm (Fig. 2f) thus reveals
µK-range changes of the temperature of a QD resulting from modulating its single
electron Coulomb blockade conductance peaks by the scanning tSOT (see sections S1314 of for additional details). This novel “scanning gate thermometry” thus adds another
powerful functionality to the tSOT allowing nanoscale manipulation of the potential and
study of the induced changes in the local scattering processes and dissipation that is
inaccessible by other methods.

5

Figure 2 | Thermal imaging of single-walled carbon nanotubes and scanning gate
thermometry of quantum dots. a-b, Thermal images of two CNT devices with loop
geometry carrying 𝐼𝑎𝑐 of 12 nA (a) and 3 nA (b) revealing an electrical short at the loop
intersection point in (b). The 𝑇𝑎𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑦) was acquired by tSOT of 104 nm diameter at
scanning heights of about 65 nm (a) and 150 nm (b). The ring-like structures in 𝑇𝑎𝑐 result
from variations in dissipation due to modulations in the single-electron charging of
individual QDs as described in (c). c, Zoomed-in scanning gate thermometry image of a
single QD in the area marked in (d) at a scan height of about 35 nm. Variations in the
electrochemical potential of the QD induced by the scanning tSOT give rise to changes of
the temperature of the QD at the Coulomb blockade peak conditions along the
equipotential ring-like contour. d-e, SEM images of the devices in (a) and (b). f, Line-cut
across the line marked in (c).
One of the topics of high interest in the studies of electronic transport at low temperatures
is the non-equilibrium heating of the electron bath and proliferation of hot carriers due to
poor electron-phonon coupling. Graphene offers a unique system where the typical
distance for such carrier - lattice cooling can exceed the dimensions of the device‎28 due to
anomalously long lifetime of the hot carriers‎29. Electron cooling rates are believed to be
sharply enhanced in the presence of disorder, however the precise mechanism of such
enhancement is poorly understood‎30.
6

a

b
Idc

Tac [mK]
1

0.65

Idc
1 µm

500 nm

0.3

Figure 3 | Scanning gate thermometry observation of dissipation at localized
resonant states at graphene edges. a, Optical image of hBN/graphene/hBN structure
patterned into a washer shape (bright) with inner and outer diameters of 2 and 6 µm. b,
Scanning ac gate thermometry 𝑇𝑎𝑐 image of the outlined area in (a) in presence of a dc
current of 6 µA applied as indicated by the arrows in (a) at carrier concentration of 10 12
cm-2. The 𝑇𝑎𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑦) was acquired by tSOT of 100 nm diameter at 4.2 K at a height of 40
nm in presence of an ac potential of 200 mV applied to the tip (see sections S13-S15).
The dashed lines mark graphene edges. The necklace of rings reveals the presence of
resonant states along the edges of graphene that serve as local centers of energy
dissipation.
To probe microscopic dissipation mechanisms in graphene we performed scanning
thermometry in high-mobility graphene encapsulated in hexagonal boron-nitride. We
used a washer shaped device to which a dc current was applied between top and bottom
constrictions as illustrated in Figure 3a (see S12 for details). Figure 3b shows the
corresponding scanning gate thermal image revealing a startling visualization of
dissipation processes, which are manifested in a complex structure of two necklaces of
rings along the inner and outer edges of the device. The sharp ring-like structures have
the same origin as the ring-like patterns in CNT in Figs. 2a-c, unveiling the presence of
localized resonant states at the edges of graphene acting as atomic-scale heat beacons.
The tSOT functions as a top gate which tunes the potential of the localized states into
resonance when the combination of its distance and the voltage 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 applied between the
tip and the sample match the resonance conditions. This gives rise to sharp rings of
enhanced temperature as described in detail in sections S13 and S15. Consequently the
7

ring radius 𝑅 changes upon varying 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 as demonstrated in Fig. S16 and Video S1 or
upon changing the tip height as demonstrated in the case of CNT in Fig. S15.
Despite the similarity between the ring-like structures observed in CNT and graphene,
their microscopic origin appears to be quite different. For CNT, the disorder potential
creates QDs which confine discrete electronic states. Since the conductance of the QD is
sharply enhanced under resonant conditions, the Coulomb blockade staircase gives rise to
the sequence of concentric rings of enhanced local temperature in presence of current
flow through the CNT (Fig. S15). In our hBN/graphene/hBN devices, in contrast, the hot
electrons flow mainly in the bulk of the graphene, while the electron-lattice cooling
occurs predominantly at defect states at graphene edges. Such defects can be formed by
the vacancies and adatoms produced at the exposed graphene edge during etching
process. Spatially localized electronic states originating from such defects, with energies
pinned to the Dirac point‎31 were recently revealed by scanning tunneling microscopy‎32.
Localized states can significantly enhance electron-phonon coupling thus providing a
local drain for the excess energy of the hot electrons‎30. Since each defect creates a single
resonant electronic state‎31 only one ring should be observed around each defect with the
radius R that depends on 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 as shown in Fig. S16 and Video S1. Acting as a gatetunable spatially localized energy flow bottlenecks, these dissipation centers are likely to
play a dominant role in the hot-carrier applications of graphene electronics. These
observations shed new light on electron-lattice cooling mechanisms in graphene, a
subject of high current interest.
The observation of striking spatially localized dissipation centers at graphene edge
underscores the potential of the tSOT technique for uncovering the microscopic origins of
dissipation in novel states of matter. Other systems of interest are topologically protected
surface states, edge states in quantum spin and anomalous quantum Hall systems, and
surface states in Weyl semimetals. By choosing appropriate superconducting
materials‎22,‎23,‎33 it should be possible to extend the operating temperature range of the
tSOT from tens of mK to tens of K (Fig. S1d) thus allowing investigation of a wide range
of quantum systems. In addition, the operation of the tSOT at elevated magnetic fields
combined with the multifunctional abilities of magnetic sensing and scanning gate
thermometry opens the way to nanoscale investigation and imaging of intricate
thermoelectric and thermomagnetic phenomena including Nernst effect, thermal Hall
effect, thermoelectric nanoscale cooling and quantum heat conductance.

8

References
1.
2.

Yue, Y. & Wang, X. Nanoscale thermal probing. Nano Reviews 3, 11586 (2012).
Giazotto, F., Heikkilä, T. T., Luukanen, A., Savin, A. M. & Pekola, J. P.
Opportunities for mesoscopics in thermometry and refrigeration: Physics and
applications, Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 217 (2006).
3. Jin, C. Y., Li, Z., Williams, R. S., Lee, K.C. & Park, I. Localized temperature and
chemical reaction control in nanoscale space by nanowire array. Nano Lett. 11,
4818–4825 (2011).
4. Kucsko, G. et al. Nanometer scale thermometry in a living cell. Nature 500, 54–58
(2013).
5. Mecklenburg, M. et al. Nanoscale temperature mapping in operating microelectronic
devices. Science 347, 6222 (2015).
6. Teyssieux, D., Thiery, L. & Cretin, B. Near-infrared thermography using a chargecoupled device camera: Application to microsystems, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 78, 034902
(2007).
7. Toyli, D. M., de las Casas, C. F., Christle, D. J., Dobrovitski, V. V. & Awschalom,
D. D. Fluorescence thermometry enhanced by the quantum coherence of single spins
in diamond. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 110, 8417–8421 (2013).
8. Neumann, P. et al. High-precision nanoscale temperature sensing using single
defects in diamond. Nano Lett. 13, 2738–2742 (2013).
9. Reparaz, J. S. et al. A novel contactless technique for thermal field mapping and
thermal conductivity determination: Two-Laser Raman Thermometry. Rev. Sci.
Instrum. 85, 034901 (2014).
10. Brites, C. D. S. et al. Thermometry at the nanoscale, Nanoscale 4, 4799–4829
(2012).
11. Majumdar, A. Scanning thermal microscopy. Annu. Rev. Mat. Sci. 29, 505-585
(1999).
12. Menges, F. et al. Temperature mapping of operating nanoscale devices by scanning
probe thermometry. Nature communications 7, 10874 (2016).
13. Kim, K., Jeong, W., Lee, W. & Reddy, P. Ultra-high vacuum scanning thermal
microscopy for nanometer resolution quantitative thermometry. ACS Nano. 6, 4248–
4257 (2012).
14. Sadat, S., Tan, A., Chua, Y. J. & Reddy, P. Nanoscale thermometry using point
contact thermocouples. Nano Lett. 10, 2613–2617 (2010).
15. Grosse, K. L., Bae, M. H., Lian, F., Pop, E. & King, W. P. Nanoscale Joule heating,
Peltier cooling and current crowding at graphene–metal contacts, Nature
Nanotechnology 6, 287-290 (2011).
9

16. Pekola, J. P. Towards quantum thermodynamics in electronic circuits. Nature
Physics 11, 118–123 (2015).
17. Landauer, R. Irreversibility and heat generation in the computing process. IBM J.
Res. Dev. 5, 183–191 (1961).
18. Bérut, A. et al. Experimental verification of Landauer’s principle linking information
and thermodynamics. Nature 483, 187–189 (2012).
19. Herr, Q. P., Herr, A. Y., Oberg, O. T. & Ioannidis, A. G. Ultra-low-power
superconductor logic. J. Appl. Phys 109, 103903 (2011).
20. Kuhn, K. J. et al. The ultimate CMOS device and beyond, IEDM Tech. Dig, 171–174
(2012).
21. Faivre, T., Golubev, D. & Pekola, J. P. Josephson junction based thermometer and its
application in bolometry. J. Appl. Phys. 116, 094302 (2014).
22. Vasyukov, D. et al. A scanning superconducting quantum interference device with
single electron spin sensitivity. Nature Nanotechnology 8, 639–644 (2013).
23. Finkler, A. et al. Self-aligned nanoscale SQUID on a tip. Nano Letters 10, 1046–
1049 (2010).
24. Schwab, K., Henriksen, E. A., Worlock, J. M. & Roukes, M. L. Measurement of the
quantum of thermal conductance. Nature 404, 974–977 (2000).
25. Shadmi, N., Geblinger, N., Ismach, A. & Joselevich, E. Formation of ordered vs
disordered carbon nanotube serpentines on anisotropic vs isotropic substrates. J.
Phys. Chem. C 118, 14044–14050 (2014).
26. Woodside, M. T. and McEuen, P. L. Scanned probe imaging of charge states in
nanotube quantum dots. Science 296, 1098-1101 (2002).
27. Grabert, H. & Devoret, M. H. Single charge tunneling: Coulomb blockade
phenomena in nanostructures, Nato Science Series B 294, Springer US (1992).
28. Bandurin, D.A. et al., Negative local resistance caused by viscous electron backflow
in graphene, Science 10.1126/science.aad0201 (2016).
29. Bistritzer, R. and MacDonald, A. H., Electronic cooling in graphene, Phys. Rev. Lett.,
102, 206410 (2009).
30. Song, J. C. W., Reizer, M. Y. and Levitov, L. S. Disorder-assisted electron-phonon
scattering and cooling pathways in graphene, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 106602 (2012).
31. Pereira, V. M., Guinea, F., Lopes dos Santos, J. M. B., Peres, N. M. R. and Castro
Neto, A. H., Disorder Induced Localized States in Graphene, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96,
036801 (2006).
32. González-Herrero, H. et al. Atomic-scale control of graphene magnetism by using
hydrogen atoms. Science 352, 437-441 (2016).
33. Lachman, E. et al. Visualization of superparamagnetic dynamics in magnetic
topological insulators, Sci. Adv. 1, e1500740 (2015).
10

Acknowledgements
We thank A. F. Young for discussions, M. V. Costache and S. O. Valenzuela for
facilitation in Py/Cu sample fabrication, D. Shahar, I. Tamir, T. Levinson and S. Mitra
for assistance in fabrication of a:In2O3 integrated devices, M. E. Huber for SOT readout
setup, and M. L. Rappaport for technical assistance. This work was supported by the
European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 program
(grant No 655416), by the Minerva Foundation with funding from the Federal German
Ministry of Education and Research, and by Rosa and Emilio Segré Research Award.
LSL and EZ acknowledge the support of MISTI MIT-Israel Seed Fund.
Author contributions
DH, JC and EZ conceived the technique and designed the experiments. DH and JC
performed the measurements. DH performed the analysis and theoretical modelling. LE
constructed the scanning SOT microscope. MBS and AKG designed and provided the
graphene sample and contributed to the analyses of the results. NS and EJ fabricated the
CNT samples. JC fabricated the Cu/Py sample. DH, HRN and JS fabricated the a:In2O3
sample. DH and YR designed and fabricated the spatial resolution demonstration sample.
HRN, YA and AU fabricated the tSOT sensors. YA and YM developed the SOT
fabrication technique. AU, YM and DH developed the tuning-fork based tSOT height
control technique. LSL performed theoretical analysis. DH, JC and EZ wrote the
manuscript. All authors participated in discussions and writing of the manuscript.
Author information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed
(dorri.halbertal@weizmann.ac.il) or EZ (eli.zeldov@weizmann.ac.il).

11

to

DH

Supplementary Information:
Nanoscale thermal imaging of dissipation in quantum systems
S1. tSOT fabrication and thermal characterization
The tSOT fabrication methods, as well as the measurement circuitry and readout
techniques, are based on the SOT technology23,24,‎34 with several modifications. The
tSOTs are fabricated by self-aligned three stage in-situ Pb deposition onto a pulled quartz
pipette with apex diameter between 40 and 300 nm cooled to about 8 K. Pb has a very
high surface diffusion and as a result grows in form of isolated islands if deposited at
room temperature or even at 77 K. The low temperature deposition is therefore required
in order to attain sufficiently uniform thin Pb films on the surface of the quartz pipettes as
described in ref. 23. The two main modifications in tSOT fabrication are the use of
grooved quartz tubes, which facilitate reliable fabrication of small tSOTs, and deposition
of an integrated Au shunt resistor in the vicinity of the apex, which adds damping
resulting in linear characteristics above 𝐼𝑐 (Fig. S1a) that are advantageous for thermal
imaging. The current through the sensor 𝐼𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 is measured using a SQUID series array
amplifier (SSAA)‎35 as shown in the inset of Fig. S1c. For 𝐼𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 < 𝐼𝑐 the device is in the
superconducting state and essentially all the applied current 𝐼𝑏𝑖𝑎𝑠 flows through the tSOT,
while at higher currents the device is in a dissipative state in which 𝐼𝑏𝑖𝑎𝑠 is distributed
between the external shunt resistor 𝑅𝑠ℎ𝑢𝑛𝑡 and the tSOT, leading to a decrease in the
slope of the characteristics.
Figure S1 shows the characteristics of the tSOT device used for the measurements in
Figs. 1 of the main text. The tSOT effective diameter of 46 nm was extracted from the
interference pattern as in Ref. 23. Figure S1a presents a set of 200 𝐼𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 vs. 𝐼𝑏𝑖𝑎𝑠 curves at
different temperatures 𝑇, color-coded between 4.2 K and 𝑇𝑐 = 7.2 K, showing the
monotonous decrease of 𝐼𝑐 with temperature. At a fixed 𝐼𝑏𝑖𝑎𝑠 = 160 μA (dotted line in
Fig. S1a) this drop in 𝐼𝑐 results in a monotonous decrease in 𝐼𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑇), as shown in Fig.
S1b, leading to a thermal response of 𝑑𝐼𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 /𝑑𝑇 = -9.5 μA/K at the base temperature.
Figure S1c presents the spectral noise density of 𝐼𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 , showing the typical 1/𝑓 noise
followed by a white noise level of 8.3 pA/Hz1/2 at frequencies above few hundred Hz.
Combining the white noise level with the thermal response gives a thermal noise of 870
nK/Hz1⁄2 at 4.2 K. Figure S1d shows the thermal noise vs. the temperature attained by
measuring the noise spectra and the thermal response at various temperatures. This result

12

Figure S1 | Characteristics of the 46 nm diameter tSOT. a, Set of 200 𝐼𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 vs. 𝐼𝑏𝑖𝑎𝑠
characteristics at various temperatures 𝑇 color coded from 4.2 to 7 K. b, Monotonically
decreasing 𝐼𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 vs. 𝑇 for 𝐼𝑏𝑖𝑎𝑠 = 160 µA giving rise to thermal response of –9.5 µA/K at
the base temperature and –13.7 µA/K close to Tc. c, tSOT current noise spectral density at
the working point at 4.2 K reaching a white noise level of 8.3 pA/Hz1⁄2. Inset: schematics
of the measurement circuit. d, Thermal noise as a function of temperature showing the
very high thermal sensitivity of the tSOT in the entire range of temperatures up to 7 K.

demonstrates that the tSOT can operate over a wide temperature range, up to 7 K, with
outstanding thermal sensitivity, down to 600 nK/Hz1⁄2. Very close to 𝑇𝑐 the thermal noise
diverges due to a decrease in the thermal response. Figure S1d shows that tSOT operates
very well in the entire temperature range of 4.2 K to 7 K. In general, the most sensitive
temperature range of the tSOT is 𝑇𝑐 ⁄2 < 𝑇 < 𝑇𝑐 where the critical current has an
approximately linear 𝑇 dependence 𝐼𝑐 (𝑇) ≅ 𝐼0 (1 − 𝑇⁄𝑇𝑐 ). At lower temperatures the
|𝑑𝐼𝑐 (𝑇)/𝑑𝑇| usually decreases and hence the sensitivity is expected to drop. This
limitation can be readily addressed by using SOTs made of lower 𝑇𝑐 superconductors
including Al [23] and In [33]. Another challenge for operation at very low temperatures
is maintaining sufficiently low 𝑅𝑠𝑑 . Our preliminary studies show that In tSOT exhibits
good thermal sensitivity in 3He exchange gas down to 700 mK. Reducing the working
13

temperature further may be achieved by immersion in liquid 3He which should allow
operation in 3He cryostat down to 250 mK and at even lower temperatures in a dilution
fridge. For operation at higher temperatures NbN, MgB2, and high-temperature
superconductors could be potentially used, thus covering the full range of temperatures of
interest for quantum systems.

S2. Correlation between the sample and tSOT temperatures
Unlike most other scanning thermal microscopy (SThM) techniques, the tSOT is not
in physical contact with the sample device under inspection. The heat mediation between
the device and the sensor is carried by variable pressure He exchange gas. A dedicated
multi-layer device (Fig. S2a) was fabricated in order to test the correlation between the
temperature measured by the tSOT and the temperature of the device. The device
comprised a SiO2/Si substrate on which Au/Cr micro-heater (25 nm/5 nm thickness) was
deposited and patterned into 12 µm wide strip (green in Fig. S2a), coated by 20 nm of
Al2O3 insulating layer using atomic layer deposition (ALD). An amorphous In2O3 film‎36
was deposited on top (33 nm thick, deposited in 1.510-5 mtorr of O2 and annealed in
vacuum for 48 hours at 40 C) and patterned into an 8 µm wide strip with multiple
contacts (red) connected to Au/Cr (25 nm/5 nm) metallic contact pads (blue).
The metal-insulator transition of the a:In2O3 gives rise to a strongly temperature
dependent resistance 𝑅(𝑇) which we utilize for self-thermometry. By globally varying
the system temperature 𝑇 we measure concurrently 𝑅(𝑇) of the device and 𝐼𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑇) of
the tSOT under thermal equilibrium conditions between the device and the sensor as
shown in Fig. S2b. From these data the corresponding thermal responses 𝑑𝑅/𝑑𝑇 = −2.4
kΩ/K and 𝑑𝐼𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 ⁄𝑑𝑇 = −10 µA/K at 4.2 K are derived (Fig. S2b). Then, by driving a
low frequency ac current in the Au micro-heater we induce local ac heating in the device
𝑑
and measure the resulting ac temperatures of the In2O3 film, 𝑇𝑎𝑐
, and of the tSOT sensor,
𝑠
𝑇𝑎𝑐 , under steady state non-equilibrium thermal conditions.

14

Figure S2 | Comparison between the sample and tSOT temperatures. a, False-color
SEM image of the sample consisting of Cr/Au micro-heater (green), 33 nm thick a:In2O3
thin film thermometer with series of contacts (red), and Au/Cr leads (blue). The microheater is insulated from the a:In2O3 by 20 nm layer of Al2O3. b, Simultaneous four probe
measurement of the resistance 𝑅(𝑇) of the central In2O3 segment of the device (blue) and
of the current 𝐼𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑇) through the tSOT (red) vs. temperature 𝑇 under thermal
equilibrium conditions. The dashed lines show the corresponding slopes and the thermal
𝑑
responses at 4.2 K. c, Simultaneously measured second-harmonic 𝑇𝑎𝑐
of the In2O3
𝑠
thermometer and 𝑇𝑎𝑐 of the tSOT vs. the total power 𝑃 dissipated in the Au heater by ac
current at 10 Hz demonstrating the close conformity of the local temperature
measurement of the tSOT. Dashed lines are linear fits to the data and demarcate the
thermal noise levels of the two measurements. Inset: Schematic cross section of the
sample and of the tSOT positioned at a relatively large height of 500 nm above the
𝑠
central segment of the In2O3 film. d, 𝑇𝑎𝑐
as a function of tSOT height ℎ above the device
𝑑
(blue) and 𝑇𝑎𝑐 of the central segment of the device (red).
Imaging was done, here and elsewhere, using an in-house-built scanning microscope
operating at 4.2 K as described in ref. 23. The measurement was performed by driving an
15

ac current of variable amplitude up to 0.35 mA at 𝑓 = 10 Hz to the underlying Au microheater of 142 Ω resistance. The use of a low frequency is a result of the high RC time
constant of the a:In2O3 device due to its high resistance (2-probe resistance of 200 kΩ).
𝑑
The resulting ac temperature variation of the device 𝑇𝑎𝑐
at 2𝑓 was measured by applying
a probing dc current of 1 µA to the current leads of the In2O3 device and measuring the
second-harmonic voltage signal on the central segment of the device using a lock-in
amplifier. A tSOT of 110 nm diameter and 2.1 µK/Hz1/2 temperature sensitivity (in the
white noise region above few hundred Hz) was positioned 500 nm above the center of the
central segment of the device (Fig. S2c inset) in 16 mbar of He exchange gas. The
relatively large height of the tSOT was used for convenience since only the average local
temperature measured by the tSOT was of importance for direct comparison with the
𝑑
temperature reading of the device. Figure S2c shows the simultaneously measured 𝑇𝑎𝑐
𝑠
and 𝑇𝑎𝑐 vs. the total power 𝑃 dissipated in the micro-heater. The dashed lines show a
linear fit to the data and also mark the noise levels of 200 µK and 4 µK of the two
measurements using 1 sec time constant of the lock-in amplifiers. The two signals scale
𝑠
𝑑
linearly with 𝑃 as expected with 𝑇𝑎𝑐
closely following 𝑇𝑎𝑐
thus establishing a
measurement of the actual device temperature by the tSOT.
𝑠
Next we applied 0.35 mA ac current in the heater and measured the 𝑇𝑎𝑐
of the tSOT
vs. the height ℎ above the device surface up to ℎ = 12 µm. Figure S2d shows an
𝑠
exponential decay of 𝑇𝑎𝑐
with the height with a characteristic length scale of 7 µm.
Similar results were attained for He gas pressures in the range of 2 to 26 mbar.
𝑑
𝑠
Interestingly, on approaching ℎ = 0 the data show a higher 𝑇𝑎𝑐
by about 22% than 𝑇𝑎𝑐
.A
similar 24% systematic difference is also observed in the data of Fig. S2c (that was taken
500 nm above the device). Such a difference can be readily accounted for by taking into
account the thermal Kapitza resistance 𝑅𝐾 at the In2O3/He gas interface which leads to
temperature discontinuity at the solid/gas interface due to phonon mismatch‎37.
Considering the measured temperature discontinuity and an estimate for the heat flow to
the gas in our geometry we attain 𝑅𝐾 ≅ 6 K·cm2/W which is consistent with the values of
the Kapitza resistance between solids and helium gas at 4.2 K available in the literature‎38.

S3. Theoretical analysis of the tSOT spatial resolution
In the presence of local dissipation we define 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) to describe the spatially
varying surface temperature of the sample taken relative to the bath temperature 𝑇0 .
Without loss of generality we will work in the limit 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) ≪ 𝑇0 . The corresponding
temperature 𝛿𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑥, 𝑦) measured by the tSOT (relative to 𝑇0 ) will be determined by a
convolution of 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) with a heat transfer kernel 𝑊(𝑟), where 𝑟 is the radial distance
from the tip center. The effective spatial resolution is then determined by the kernel 𝑊(𝑟)
which depends on the diameter 𝐷 of the tip and the scanning height ℎ above the surface.
Our analysis is based on the assumption of ballistic flow of He atoms between the
sample surface and the tSOT which for our geometry holds for He gas pressures of up to
about 50 mbar [‎39]. We assume for simplicity that each atom carries an excess energy
16

proportional to the surface temperature 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) at the point of its origin and deposits this
entire excess energy to the tSOT upon first encounter with its surface. We also assume
that He atoms are scattered from the sample surface with a uniform angular distribution
into the half space above the surface. These assumptions make our estimate a worst case
scenario, while a more complete analysis should predict a better resolution. This is
because the scattering probability is expected to be higher for smaller azimuthal angles
and also because we ignore the contributions of multiple atom collisions between the
sample and the tSOT which are more likely to happen for atoms trapped in the narrow
gap between the tip apex and the sample.
We model the tSOT as a disc of diameter 𝐷 that resides in the 𝑧 = ℎ plane, centered
at 𝑥 = 𝑦 = 0. A planar sample is positioned at the 𝑧 = 0 plane. Following the above
assumptions the probability density distribution of atoms departing from the origin within
a small solid angle ∆Ω that covers an area ∆𝑆 on the 𝑧 = ℎ plane positioned at a radial
distance 𝑟 is ∆Ω/∆S = ℎ(ℎ2 +𝑟2 )−3/2. Using this expression we estimate the probability of an
atom originating at 𝒓 = (𝑥, 𝑦) on the sample surface to collide with the tSOT. The
resulting 2D heat transfer kernel 𝑊(𝑟) is given by
𝐷/2

𝑊(𝒓) = ∫0

2𝜋

𝑑𝜌𝜌 ∫0 𝑑𝛼ℎ(ℎ2 + (𝑥 − 𝜌 cos 𝛼)2 + (𝑦 − 𝜌 sin 𝛼)2 )−3/2 /2𝜋

Accordingly, the corresponding tSOT temperature is given by
𝛿𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑥, 𝑦) = (4𝜂/𝜋𝐷2 ) ∫ 𝑑𝑥′ ∫ 𝑑𝑦′ 𝑊(𝑥 − 𝑥 ′ , 𝑦 − 𝑦′)𝛿𝑇(𝑥 ′ , 𝑦′),
where 𝜂 is a proportionality constant determined by the heat flow balance conditions.
Since in this section we are interested only in the spatial resolution of the tSOT response
function in the ballistic regime we take 𝜂 = 1 for simplicity. Accordingly, the kernel
𝑊(𝑟) is properly normalized such that a uniform surface temperature 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝛿𝑇
results in 𝛿𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝛿𝑇.
In the same vein, for the case of a 1D heat source, where 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝛿𝑇(𝑥), we
deduce a 1D tSOT kernel function
𝐷/2

𝑊1 (𝑥) = ∫ 𝑑𝑦 𝑊(𝑥, 𝑦) = (ℎ/𝜋) ∫0

2𝜋

𝑑𝜌𝜌 ∫0 𝑑𝛼 (ℎ2 + (𝑥 − 𝜌 cos 𝛼)2 )−1

and
𝛿𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑥) = (4𝜂/𝜋𝐷2 ) ∫ 𝑑𝑥′ 𝑊1 (𝑥 − 𝑥 ′ )𝛿𝑇(𝑥′).
Figure S3a presents the 2D kernel 𝑊(𝑟) at different normalized heights ℎ/𝐷,
indicating a highly localized behavior up to ℎ/𝐷 ≅ 0.5. We define the spatial resolution
of the sensor for given tSOT diameter D and scanning height ℎ as the full width at half
maximum (FWHM) of 𝑊(𝑥, 𝑦 = 0). Figure S3b plots the resulting spatial resolution as a
function of D and ℎ with dashed lines indicating contours of 50, 100 and 150 nm spatial
resolution. Note that for small ℎ the contours are essentially vertical, showing that for
ℎ ≪ 𝐷 the spatial resolution is equal to 𝐷. Even at larger heights of ℎ ≅ 𝐷/2 a fair
resolution is attained. For example, a tSOT of 𝐷 = 75 nm at ℎ = 50 nm provides a spatial
resolution of close to 100 nm.

17

Figure S3 | Theoretical analysis of the spatial resolution of tSOT. a, The tSOT 2D
heat transfer kernel function for different heights ℎ above a planar sample for ballistic
transport of helium atoms. b, The resulting spatial resolution of the tSOT technique
(defined as FWHM of the kernel function) as a function of tSOT diameter 𝐷 and
scanning height ℎ with contour lines marking resolution of 50, 100, and 150 nm. c,
Calculated thermal signal measured by tSOT of 𝐷 = 100 nm at several scan heights
above a square surface temperature profile 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) with 100 nm wide steps and 150 nm
gaps without heat diffusion in the substrate as indicated by black line. d, Calculated
surface temperature (black line) and the tSOT thermal signal as in c in presence of heat
diffusion in the substrate. The shape of the thermal profiles is independent of heat
conductivity of the substrate.
Figure S3c presents the calculated tSOT signal for a 𝐷 = 100 nm device at different
heights above a 100 nm square-shaped surface temperature profile 𝛿𝑇(𝑥) as indicated by
the black line. The tSOT of 100 nm diameter can clearly resolve such temperature profile
at low scan heights. However, in practical planar samples, such square-shaped surface
temperature profile cannot be readily realized due to heat diffusion in the substrate which
causes a significant broadening of the surface temperature. This broadening can be
18

understood by noting that the diffusion equation for a 1D heat source and a homogeneous
3D substrate gives a heat flux that drops as 1/𝑟, where 𝑟 is the radial distance from the
line-source. This results in a log(𝑟) temperature decay. Note that this long-range
temperature decay is universal and is independent of the thermal conductivity of the
substrate.
Figure S4a presents a numerical solution of the heat diffusion equation showing the
temperature distribution 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑧) in the bulk of a semi-infinite sample containing a 1D
heater of 110 nm × 30 nm cross section extending in the 𝑦 direction. The black curve in
Fig. S4b shows the corresponding surface temperature 𝛿𝑇(𝑥) of the sample displaying
the long-range decaying tail that is well described by log(𝑟) dependence (dashed curve).
The colored curves in Fig. S4b show the calculated 𝛿𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑥) profiles for a 𝐷 = 100 nm
tSOT at various heights ℎ above the surface. For small ℎ values the tSOT kernel causes
rounding of the sharp features on the scale 𝑥 < 𝐷 but otherwise 𝛿𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑥) closely
follows the surface 𝛿𝑇(𝑥). In particular, for 𝑥 > ~2𝐷 in the slow log(𝑟) tail region, the
profile 𝛿𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑥) is almost indistinguishable from the surface 𝛿𝑇(𝑥) for up to ℎ ≅ 100
nm. This result demonstrates that at larger distances the measured 𝛿𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑥) is
dominated by heat diffusion in the substrate rather than the intrinsic spatial resolution of
the tSOT. Moreover, the log(𝑟) tail is a characteristic fingerprint of the actual surface
temperature of the sample and cannot arise from the tSOT heat transfer kernel.

Figure S4 | Comparison of heat profiles above a 1D heater: simulation vs.
experimental results. a, Numerical solution of the temperature distribution in the bulk of
the sample 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑧) comprising of an infinite slab heater of 110 nm width and 30 nm
thickness (outlined in green), embedded in a semi-infinite homogeneous substrate. The
heat conductivity within the heater cross section is taken to be much higher than that of
the substrate. The resulting functional dependence of the temperature distribution in the
bulk is characterized by a universal log(𝑟) dependence independent of the heat
conductivity of the substrate. b, The surface temperature of the sample 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑧 = 0)
(black line) and the calculated temperature 𝛿𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑥) of a 𝐷 =100 nm tSOT scanned at
different heights ℎ (as indicated). c, The experimentally measured temperature profiles
𝑇𝑎𝑐 (𝑥) at different scan heights above a nanowire heater. The sample and the tSOT are
described in Fig. S5, where the current 𝐼𝑎𝑐 was applied only to the central nanowire. The
dotted lines in b and c are fits to log(𝑟) asymptotic behavior, characterizing the
long-range heat diffusion in the substrate.
19

Figure S3d shows a similar calculation for the case where three such 1D heaters are
placed 150 nm apart of each other in a semi-infinite substrate. The black curve, which
describes the surface 𝛿𝑇(𝑥), indicates that the heat signals of the three heaters strongly
overlap due to the slow log(𝑟) tail, producing only weak shoulders at the heater
positions. We emphasize that the surface 𝛿𝑇(𝑥) in this case is independent of the value of
the heat conductivity of the substrate (up to a constant factor). The corresponding
𝛿𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑥) well resolves the shoulders up to ℎ ≅ 𝐷/2 while further away from the heaters
the profile 𝛿𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑥) is essentially indistinguishable from 𝛿𝑇(𝑥) at even higher scan
heights, demonstrating once more the dominance of substrate heat diffusion in the
thermal signal.

S4. Experimental demonstration of the tSOT spatial resolution
In order to demonstrate the actual spatial resolution limit of the tSOT sensor, one has
to design an experiment in which the surface temperature changes on short length scales
and the dominant role of the heat diffusion in the substrate is reduced. For this purpose
three parallel Pd-Au nanowire structures were fabricated on SiO2/Si substrate (SiO2
thickness of 150 nm). Each nanowire is 110 nm wide and 30 nm thick including 5 nm Ti
adhesion layer, with 155 nm gap between the nanowires. A trench of 1.4 μm width and
117 nm depth was then etched into the SiO2 layer using buffered HF solution, resulting in
a suspended segment of the three nanowires as shown in tilted SEM image in Fig. S5a.
The device was thermally imaged in various current configurations with a tSOT of
effective magnetic diameter of 55 nm (determined from the period of tSOT quantum
interference) and physical inner and outer diameters of 20 nm and 100 nm respectively.
We first drive an ac current 𝐼𝑎𝑐 = 0.7 µA at 663 Hz through the central nanowire
resulting in an average dissipation of 8 pW per square segment of the wire and measure
𝑇𝑎𝑐 of the tSOT across the wire at different scanning heights ℎ as shown in Fig. S4c. The
experimental data are in very good qualitative agreement with our numerical results in
Fig. S4b. In particular, the log(𝑟) temperature decay (dashed line) is clearly reproduced,
with the very weak ℎ dependence away from the origin confirming the dominant role of
heat diffusion in the substrate and the locality of the tSOT kernel. We note that the
qualitative behavior is not affected significantly by the fact that the nanowire is
suspended. This is due to the fact that the suspended segment is short (1.4 µm) relative to
the full length of the nanowire and the suspension height is only 117 nm. As a result, the
long-range heat diffusion in the substrate is still governed by a 1D heat source, which
gives rise to the observed log(𝑟) behavior. Next, we applied a total of 𝐼𝑎𝑐 = 0.5 µA at
663 Hz to the three nanowires in parallel and imaged the temperature distribution at
ℎ ≅15 nm as shown in Fig. S5b. A line cut through the data is shown in Fig. S5c. The
presence of the two outer nanowire heaters is visible as shoulders in the 𝑇𝑎𝑐 profiles
followed by log(𝑟) tails in very good qualitative agreement with the numerical results in
Fig. S3d. Note that even though 𝑇𝑎𝑐 in the suspended segment in Fig. S5b (outlined by
the dotted lines) is higher than in the non-suspended regions, the log(𝑟) decay through
the substrate is essentially the same as discussed above.
20

Figure S5 | Experimental demonstration of spatial resolution of tSOT. a, SEM image
(tilted at 45) of three Pd-Au nanowire heaters (110 nm wide, 30 nm thick, 155 nm
separation) suspended above a 1.4 µm wide and 117 nm deep trench etched into SiO2/Si
substrate. b-d, Thermal imaging 𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑥, 𝑦) of the device in three different measurement
schemes using tSOT of 𝐷 = 100 nm at scan height of ℎ = 15 nm. b, Thermal image due to
ac current applied in parallel to all three nanowires dissipating 3 pW per square segment of
nanowire measured at the second harmonic of 663 Hz. White dotted lines indicate edges of
the trench. c, Thermal profiles across the device for the cases of central wire heater, three
wire heaters (along green line in b), compensated total power (along blue line in d), and
tSOT heating (along red line in e). Inset: a schematic to-scale cross section of the
experimental setup including the substrate (light blue), nanowires (orange), and tSOT apex
(blue). d, Thermal image for the case of “heat dipole” in which 𝑃𝑎𝑐 ≅ 8.7 pW per square
segment of nanowire is dissipated in the central wire while out-of-phase power of 𝑃𝑎𝑐 ≅ 4.2 pW and -4.5 pW per square segment of nanowire is “absorbed” in the two outer wires
thus suppressing the long-range heat diffusion in the substrate (all measured at the second
harmonic of 663 Hz). e, Thermal image with no current flowing in the wires while a larger
current of 152 µA is driven through the tSOT causing dissipation in the tip apex. The
resulting increase in the local temperature in the suspended nanowires during scanning is
larger than in the recessed substrate as expected from the ballistic model. The scan window
is within the suspended section. Time constants are 30 ms/pixel in all images, pixel sizes
are 13 nm (b), 10 nm (d) and 10 nm (e).
21

We emphasize that the temperature 𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑥, 𝑦) measured by the non-contact tSOT
scanning at height ℎ above the sample reﬂects the local temperature proﬁle of the sample
convoluted with the height dependent kernel 𝑊. Consequently, in the case of suspended
nanowires the 𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑥, 𝑦) reﬂects the temperature of the nanowires as well as the
background temperature of the substrate in-between the wires. In contrast, contact-based
vacuum SThM11-15 would detect only the temperature of the suspended nanowires if
scanning at a height corresponding to the top surface plane of the nanowires.
The above cases indicate that heat diffusion in the bulk has a dominant effect on the
surface temperature distribution. This long-range contribution, however, can be
significantly suppressed by two methods as follows. The first approach takes advantage
of the fact that the phase of the ac power 𝑃𝑎𝑐 can be readily controlled. Consider a wire
carrying a low frequency ac current 𝐼 cos(𝜔𝑡), which results in power dissipation
𝑃 = 𝑃0 cos2 (𝜔𝑡) = 0.5𝑃0 + 0.5𝑃0 cos(2𝜔𝑡) = 𝑃𝑑𝑐 + 𝑃𝑎𝑐 . As a result, the wire creates a
certain surface temperature profile 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑡) = 𝜏(𝑥) + 𝜏(𝑥) cos(2𝜔𝑡). Note that the
temperature profile for the same wire carrying current of 𝐼 sin(𝜔𝑡) will be 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑡) =
𝜏(𝑥) − 𝜏(𝑥) cos(2𝜔𝑡) with a negative ac term. Let us consider two such wires at 𝑥 = −𝑑
and 𝑥 = 𝑑 carrying currents 𝐼 cos(𝜔𝑡) and 𝐼 sin(𝜔𝑡). The resulting temperature
distribution will now be given by 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑡) = 𝛿𝑇𝑑𝑐 (𝑥) + 𝑇𝑎𝑐 (𝑥) cos(2𝜔𝑡) =
(𝜏(𝑥 − 𝑑) + 𝜏(𝑥 + 𝑑)) + (𝜏(𝑥 − 𝑑) − 𝜏(𝑥 + 𝑑)) cos(2𝜔𝑡). Since the instantaneous 𝑃 is
always positive, the instantaneous 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑡) and 𝛿𝑇𝑑𝑐 are positive as well. However,
𝑇𝑎𝑐 (𝑥) can be either positive or negative. In particular, when the two wires overlap
(𝑑 = 0), 𝑇𝑎𝑐 (𝑥) = 0 everywhere and 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑡) = 2𝜏(𝑥). This is because 𝑃𝑎𝑐 of the first
wire is fully “absorbed” by the negative 𝑃𝑎𝑐 of the second wire. When the two wires are
𝑡𝑜𝑡
separated, the total 𝑃𝑎𝑐
remains zero and the corresponding 𝑇𝑎𝑐 (𝑥) attains a “dipole”
structure with positive and negative values on the two wires. As a result, the long-range
log(𝑟) decay of 𝑇𝑎𝑐 (𝑥) of a single wire is replaced by a faster 1/𝑟 behavior. Applying
this additional degree of freedom to three wires we can produce much more local 𝑇𝑎𝑐 (𝑥)
temperature profiles. We implement this concept here by driving 𝐼𝑎𝑐 in the central wire
and ~𝐼𝑎𝑐 /√2 with a phase shift of 𝜋/2 in each of the outer wires. As a result, the power
𝑃𝑎𝑐 dissipated in the central wire is mostly “absorbed” by −𝑃𝑎𝑐 /2 in each of the outer
𝑡𝑜𝑡
wires thus forming a “screened” local source with total 𝑃𝑎𝑐
~0. The resulting 𝑇𝑎𝑐 image
in Fig. S5d and the corresponding line profile in Fig. S5c show a narrow temperature
peak and the strong suppression of the log(𝑟) tail, demonstrating the high spatial
resolution of the tSOT. The above three current schemes are summarized by numerical
simulations in Fig. S6. The temperature distribution in the bulk of the substrate for the
𝑡𝑜𝑡
cases of single heater, three heaters, and 𝑃𝑎𝑐
~0 are shown in Figs. S6a-c, and the
corresponding 𝛿𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑥) for 𝐷 = 100 nm at ℎ = 15 nm are presented in Fig. S6d
demonstrating a proper description of the experimental data. In particular, the width of
𝑡𝑜𝑡
the measured 𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 signal at FWHM of the 𝑃𝑎𝑐
~0 of 284 nm in Fig. S5c is in excellent
agreement with the calculated width of 270 nm in Fig. S6d.

22

Figure S6 | Theoretical comparison of different heating schemes. a, Temperature
distribution 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑧) in the bulk of the sample due to a 1D heater of 110 nm × 30 nm
cross section (green outline) embedded in a semi-infinite substrate. b, Temperature
distribution due to three such heaters separated by a gap of 155 nm. c, Temperature
𝑡𝑜𝑡
distribution in the case of a “heat dipole” with 𝑃𝑎𝑐
~0 in which each of the two outer
heaters “absorbs” 43% of the ac power dissipated by the central heater (see text). d,
Calculated temperature profiles for 𝐷 = 100 nm tSOT scanning at ℎ = 15 nm above the
surface in the three cases a-c and for the case of local heating by the tSOT.
Finally, we present an alternative approach to reduce the long-range substrate heat
diffusion contribution based on the fact that for the case of a point source the heat flux in
the substrate drops as 1/𝑟 2 resulting in 1/𝑟 decay of the surface temperature rather than
the log(𝑟) behavior for 1D heat source. In order to implement a point source we can use
the tSOT itself as a point heater by driving a current through the tip, significantly larger
than the critical current, thus causing a local heating of the tSOT apex. This point-like
heater will cause local heating of the sample surface which in turn causes a corresponding
change in the tSOT temperature. A similar mechanism is commonly used in SThM
schemes in which a warm scanning tip acts as a local heat source‎40,‎41. In our sample
geometry and in the ballistic He transport regime, the tip that scans at a constant height
will locally heat up the suspended nanowires when hovering 15 nm directly above their
surface. When passing above the gaps between the wires, in contrast, the local heating of
the etched SiO2 substrate that resides some 162 nm below the tip will be significantly
smaller due to the much larger solid angle, leading to a sharp temperature contrast
between the nanowires and the substrate. Figure S5e presents a thermal image of the
suspended section in this “tSOT heater” mode showing three sharply resolved nanowires.
The line cut through the image is presented in Fig. S5c with a width of the central peak at
FWHM of only 132 nm as compared to 110 nm width of the nanowire and the tSOT
diameter of 100 nm. We can model this situation by approximating a step-like change in
23

the effective surface temperature of a sample as shown in Fig. S3c. In this case the
rounding of the thermal signal will be determined only by the tSOT kernel. Figure S6d
“step T profile” presents the calculated 𝛿𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 (𝑥) profile using ℎ = 15 nm and 𝐷 = 100
nm which shows a very good correspondence with the experimental data albeit with a
larger temperature modulation. Since the width of the nanowires is comparable to 𝐷 the
actual effective surface temperature of the sample due to the heating by the scanning
tSOT is expected to be also significantly rounded explaining the reduced modulation.
Interestingly, in Fig. S5e a higher 𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 temperature is attained above the suspended
nanowires in contrast to what one may expect. This counter-intuitive behavior results
from the height differences and the fact that the He atoms are in ballistic rather than
diffusive regime. The local density of heat flow from the warm tip to the sample and the
corresponding local surface temperature increase are strongly height dependent due to
solid angle considerations. Since the suspended nanowires are much closer to the tip,
their local temperature increase is significantly larger as compared to the temperature
increase of the deeper Si substrate between the wires, leading to the increased 𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇
above the nanowires. Indeed, similar measurements in the planar region where the
nanowires reside on the substrate show a lower 𝑇𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 above the nanowires due to their
higher heat conductivity.
The above experimental results in various dissipation schemes are well described by
our numerical calculations and clearly demonstrate that the spatial resolution of the tSOT
at low scanning heights is comparable to the tip diameter 𝐷.

S5. Demonstration of tSOT temperature sensitivity
Our various tSOT sensors display thermal sensitivities of the order of 1 µK/Hz1⁄2.
Figure S7a demonstrates imaging of such low thermal signals in practice, using a 120 nm
wide Cu nanowire on SiO2 /Si substrate (SiO2 thickness of 1 µm) carrying an ac current
causing an ac heat dissipation in the nanowire at 2𝑓 = 13.1 kHz. Figure S7 presents two
𝑇𝑎𝑐 profiles by scanning with the 46 nm diameter tSOT (same tSOT as used for Fig. 1)
across the nanowire at two levels of power dissipation 𝑃 per square segment of the
nanowire. The blue data were acquired at 𝑃 = 143 pW while the red data were measured
at 𝑃 = 57 fW close to the Landauer limit of 40 fW for 1 GHz qubit operation. The 𝑇𝑎𝑐
profiles show a sharp peak above the nanowire and extended tails due to heat diffusion in
the SiO2/Si substrate.

24

Figure S7 | Demonstration of tSOT temperature sensitivity. 𝑇𝑎𝑐 profiles across a 120
nm wide Cu nanowire at dissipation powers of 143 pW (blue) and 57 fW (red) per square
segment measured by a tSOT of 46 nm diameter. The data were acquired using lock-in
amplifier time constants of 0.3 sec and 1 sec respectively at height of 120 nm above the
surface. Inset: schematic diagram of the Cu nanowire sample and the scanning tSOT.

S6. Assessment of thermal resistances of the tSOT
Figure 1d of the main text shows a simplified low-frequency thermal model of the
tSOT scanning system. Evaluation of 𝑅𝑠𝑑 and 𝑅𝑠𝑠 is thus highly desirable for proper
utilization and optimization of the tSOT sensor. In the following we assess theoretically
the sensor-device thermal resistance 𝑅𝑠𝑑 and then determine experimentally the
corresponding sensor-support resistance 𝑅𝑠𝑠 .
Since at 4.2 K and 1 mbar pressure the mean free path of He atoms is ~3 µm we
consider for our scanning heights a molecular flow regime in which He atoms flow
ballistically between the sample surface and the apex of the tSOT sensor. According to
Kennard's law‎39 the net power flux 𝛺 per unit temperature hitting a unit area under this
√ 𝑅 ) 𝑝 ≡ 𝛽𝑝. Here 𝛼 is the accommodation coefficient (here taken
regime is 𝛺 = (𝛼 𝛾+1
𝛾−1 8𝜋𝑀𝑇
as unity), 𝛾 is the adiabatic constant, 𝑅 is the universal gas constant, 𝑀 is the molar mass,
𝑝 the gas pressure, and 𝑇 = 4.2 K the surface temperature (assumed to be much larger
than the induced ac temperature variations) resulting in 𝛽 = 18 m/s/K. 𝑅𝑠𝑑 is then given
by 𝑅𝑠𝑑 = 1/(𝛽𝑆𝑝), where 𝑆 = 𝜋𝐷2 /4 is the surface area of a tSOT of diameter 𝐷.
Figure S8 shows the resulting 𝑅𝑠𝑑 (𝑝) calculated for 𝐷 = 240 nm tSOT vs. the He
pressure 𝑝. 𝑅𝑠𝑑 can be readily varied from about 1.61010 K/W at 1 mbar to 5108 K/W
at 30 mbar.
25

Figure S8 | Thermal resistances of tSOT. Red: Calculated thermal resistance 𝑅𝑠𝑑
between the sensor and the sample device for 240 nm tSOT vs. the He pressure 𝑝 in the
𝑠
molecular flow regime. Blue circles: measured tSOT ac temperature 𝑇𝑎𝑐
at height of 100
nm above a thin film heater vs. He pressure. Dashed blue line is a theoretical fit resulting
in thermal resistance between the tSOT sensor and its quartz support structure of 𝑅𝑠𝑠 =
0.91010 K/W.
𝑠
Solving the effective circuit of Fig. 1d, the relation between the ac temperatures 𝑇𝑎𝑐
𝑑
𝑠
𝑑
−1
of the tSOT and 𝑇𝑎𝑐 of the device is given by 𝑇𝑎𝑐 /𝑇𝑎𝑐 = [1 + 𝑅𝑠𝑑 ⁄𝑅𝑠𝑠 ]
=
[1 + (𝑅𝑠𝑠 𝛽𝑆𝑝)−1 ]−1 . A tSOT sensor of 240 nm diameter was held at a height of 100 nm
above the surface of a metallic thin film heater of 170 Ω resistance driven by an ac
𝑠
current of 10 µA at 3.7 kHz and the 𝑇𝑎𝑐
was measured as a function of the He pressure 𝑝
as shown in Fig. S8 (blue circles). The dashed line shows an excellent fit to the data using
𝑑
the above equation with resulting 𝑇𝑎𝑐
= 10.4 mK and 𝑅𝑠𝑠 = 0.91010 K/W. Such
remarkably high thermal resistance between the sensor and the supporting quartz pipette,
even for the extreme case of a large tSOT (relative to other tSOT devices used throughout
the presented work), cannot be explained by naively taking into account the bulk thermal
conductivity of quartz. The nanoscale cross section of the pipette, however, quenches the
radial phonon degrees of freedom resulting in quantum-limited thermal
conductance24,‎42,‎43. A 1D channel with a single phonon mode has a quantum thermal
resistance of 𝑅0 = 3ℎ/(𝜋 2 𝑘 2 𝑇) = 2.521011 K/W at 4.2 K. The derived 𝑅𝑠𝑠 thus implies
about 28 quantum channels of thermal conductance in our 240 nm diameter tSOT. The 46
nm tSOT in the main text may thus support only one or two channels resulting in 𝑅𝑠𝑠 in
excess of 1011 K/W.

26

An additional insight can be drawn from the presented pressure dependence of the
thermal signal regarding the governing heat transfer processes. Since the signal vanishes
in the low pressure limit, the possible contribution of near-field radiative processes to the
heat transfer between the sample and the tSOT is apparently negligible under the
presented working conditions.

S7. Bandwidth of the tSOT thermal imaging
Thermal processes at the nano-scale may have very short relaxation times and hence
it is highly desirable for a nano-thermometer to have a high bandwidth (BW) to study
relaxation processes. Figure S9 shows the frequency response of tSOT positioned at a
relatively large distance of 500 nm above an Au thin film heater in He exchange gas
pressure of 26 mbar. The figure shows the measured 𝑇𝑎𝑐 vs. the frequency 𝑓 of the heat
signal (second harmonic) for two values of the ac power in the heater demonstrating BW
of over 200 kHz which was limited by the BW of our electronic readout circuit.

Figure S9 | Bandwidth characterization of the tSOT. Frequency dependence of 𝑇𝑎𝑐
measured by a tSOT 500 nm above Au heater for ac heater powers of 8.8 µW and 2.2
µW. Dashed red line shows the data collapse by multiplying the low power signal by 4.
The bandwidth of 200 kHz is limited by external readout electronics.

We can estimate the intrinsic thermal BW of the tSOT as following. The thermal time
constant of the tSOT driven by the heat source in the sample should be given by sensor
thermal mass times the sensor-heater thermal resistance 𝑅𝑠𝑑 . The mass of the Pb apex of
27

a tSOT with diameter D = 100 nm and thickness of 10 nm is approximately 10-18 Kg and
therefore has a heat capacity of about C = 10-18 J/K, taking Pb specific heat‎44 as 0.042
cal⁄Kg ∙ mole. For 𝑅𝑠𝑑 that is typically below 1010 K/W, the resulting intrinsic tSOT
bandwidth is therefore above 10 MHz.

S8. Tuning-fork based height control
In some of the measurements performed throughout this work (graphene
measurements and the tSOT spatial resolution measurement) scan heights above the
sample were controlled by mechanically attaching the tSOT to a quartz tuning-fork (TF).
The used TF is a quartz oscillator with nominal frequency of 32.768 kHz (product
number TB38 of HM international). The TF was filed along three planes to adapt it to
scanning constraints without violating the inversion symmetry of its two prongs. The
filing shifted the resonant frequency to about 37 kHz. The tSOT protruded a few tens of
µm above the highest point of the TF as demonstrated in Fig. S10. The TF was
mechanically excited using a piezo-electric crystal as a dither. The TF’s response was
read electrically through the voltage on its electrodes, which was pre-amplified at room
temperature and fed into a lock-in amplifier. This assembly has a quality factor of
~30,000 at a temperature of 4.2 K and vacuum conditions. As the tSOT approaches
heights of ~10 nm above the surface of the sample its electrostatic interaction with the
surface affects the resonant frequency of the TF. By applying a phase-locked loop (PLL)
this frequency shift is monitored and used to determine the proximity of the tip to the
sample. The scanning is then performed at a constant z-plane at a determined height
above the sample surface.

Figure S10 | Quartz crystal tuning fork resonator for tSOT height control. A SEM
image showing a side view of the filed TF with the attached tSOT pipette. The tSOT
protrudes typically 50 to 100 µm beyond the TF.

28

S9. Simultaneous magnetic and thermal imaging
By applying a proper combination of magnetic field 𝐻𝑧 and 𝐼𝑏𝑖𝑎𝑠 , the tSOT can be
tuned to have both magnetic field and thermal sensitivity, thus providing a unique
capability of simultaneous magnetic and thermal imaging. Figure S11a shows a SEM
micrograph of a “zigzag” nanostructure consisting of alternating segments of 100 nm
wide Cu and 80 nm wide ferromagnetic Py (Ni80Fe20) wires. An ac current 𝐼𝑎𝑐 = 10 µA is
applied to the sample at 𝑓 = 6.56 kHz and three signals are acquired simultaneously from
the tSOT during scanning: time-averaged dc and two ac signals at frequencies 𝑓 and 2𝑓
using two lock-in amplifiers. At the used bias conditions the tSOT had a thermal response
of -8.6 µA/K and a simultaneous magnetic response of 91 nA/mT.
The dc signal provides an image of the dc magnetic field 𝐵𝑧𝑑𝑐 (Fig. S11b) in presence
of out-of-plane 𝜇0 𝐻𝑧 = 0.32 T and an in-plane field 𝜇0 𝐻|| = 0.1 T applied parallel to the
Py nanowires. The image reveals that the Py nanowires are in a single in-plane
magnetization domain state giving rise to the sharp peaks in the stray field 𝐵𝑧𝑑𝑐 at the
ends of the nanowires. The Py nanowires also show a weaker bright signal along their
length due to the out-of-plane tilting of the magnetic moments by 𝐻𝑧 .
Figure S11c presents the first-harmonic ac component, which describes the ac
magnetic signal 𝐵𝑧𝑎𝑐 , generated by 𝐼𝑎𝑐 . It shows that the current flows continuously along
the zigzag structure avoiding the upper protruding parts of the nanostructures. This is
quantitatively confirmed by the Biot-Savart law numerical simulation of 𝐵𝑧𝑎𝑐 in the inset,
also providing an accurate estimate of the tSOT scanning height of 175 nm.
The power dissipated in a resistor 𝑅 due to a sinusoidal ac current 𝐼𝑎𝑐 = 𝐼0 cos 𝜔𝑡 is
2
given by 𝑃 = 𝑅𝐼𝑎𝑐
= 𝑅𝐼02 (1 + cos 2𝜔𝑡)/2 giving rise to dc temperature increase 𝑇𝑑𝑐 and
ac temperature variation 𝑇𝑎𝑐 at 2𝜔. Figure S11d shows the resulting temperature map 𝑇𝑎𝑐
(the accompanying dc signal due to 𝑇𝑑𝑐 is substantially smaller than 𝐵𝑧𝑑𝑐 and was
subtracted from Fig. S11b for clarity). In contrast to the very uniform 𝐵𝑧𝑎𝑐 along the
zigzag structure in Fig. S11c, 𝑇𝑎𝑐 in Fig. S11d is highly non-uniform revealing a
significantly higher temperature of the Py segments. This is the result of about 40 times
higher sheet resistance 18 /□ in Py than in Cu nanowires, giving rise to significantly
higher dissipation along the Py segments. Interestingly, the nanowire segments
protruding beyond the top corners of the zigzag also display an increased temperature
despite the fact that no current flows there, revealing higher thermal conductivity of the
metallic nanowires as compared to the underlying substrate. The tSOT thus provides
multifunctional abilities for simultaneous imaging of magnetic and thermal signals.

29

Figure S11 | Simultaneous scanning tSOT thermal and magnetic imaging. a, False
color SEM image of zigzag structure of alternating Cu (red) and Py (blue) nanowires. b,
Image of 𝐵𝑧𝑑𝑐 in presence of applied magnetic fields of 𝜇0 𝐻𝑧 = 0.32 T and 𝜇0 𝐻|| = 0.1 T
revealing the in-plane magnetization of Py segments. c, 𝐵𝑧𝑎𝑐 due to applied 𝐼𝑎𝑐 = 10 µA
at 6.56 kHz through the structure. Inset: Theoretically calculated 𝐵𝑧𝑎𝑐 175 nm above the
sample. d, Simultaneously measured thermal image of 𝑇𝑎𝑐 at 2f showing significantly
higher dissipation in Py segments (pixel size 50 nm, scan speed 120 ms/pixel).

S10. Carbon nanotube fabrication
The SWCNT devices were fabricated on p-doped Si (100) with a thermally grown
oxide layer of 300 nm, as reported previously25. Briefly, parallel stripes (25 μm wide, 25
nm thick) of amorphous SiO2 coated by a thin layer (nominally 0.3 nm) of Fe growth
catalyst were deposited on the substrate by standard photolithography and electron-beam
evaporation. The samples were introduced into a tube furnace and were heated to 550° C
for 20 min in air to remove organic contaminations. The SWCNT were grown by CVD:
samples were heated to 900° C in an atmosphere of 300 sccm Ar and 200 sccm H2,
followed by introduction of 1 sccm C2H4. Growth time was 45 min, by the end of which
samples were left to cool in Ar. Electrodes for transport measurements were subsequently
patterned by electron beam lithography, followed by deposition of 20 nm of Pd for
Ohmic contacts and 10 nm of Au.

30

S11. Transport characterization of the CNT devices
Figure S12 presents the electrical characterization of the two SWCNT devices
discussed in the main text as a function of the applied back gate voltage 𝑉𝑔 . Both devices
are highly disordered, forming a series of quantum dots, resulting in very low
conductance and large fluctuations of the conductance vs. 𝑉𝑔 . Device 1 (Figs. S12a and
2a) shows a metallic behavior with finite conductance at all values of 𝑉𝑔 , while device 2
(Figs. S12b and 2b) shows a semiconducting behavior.

Figure S12 | Gate dependence of SWCNT conductance at 4.2 K. a, Device 1
measured with applied ac voltage of 80 mV at 31.5 Hz showing a highly disordered
metallic behavior. b, Device 2 measured with ac voltage of 110 mV at 28.9 Hz showing a
semiconducting behavior.

S12. hBN encapsulated graphene device fabrication
The devices were fabricated from single-layer graphene encapsulated between
crystals of hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) (40 nm thick bottom crystal and 12 nm top).
The transfer of the crystals was carried out using the dry-peel technique described
previously‎45. The heterostructures were assembled on top of an oxidized Si wafer (90 nm
of SiO2) which served as a back gate, and then annealed at 300 C in Ar-H2 atmosphere
for 3 hours. A PMMA mask defining the shape of the device was fabricated on top of the
annealed hBN-graphene-hBN stack by electron-beam lithography. The stack was etched
in O2/CHF3 plasma with fast selective removal of hBN‎46. Metallic contacts (Niobium)
were implemented in a second stage where an additional PMMA mask was used for both
etching the stack and for the metal lift-off‎46. This procedure is similar to previous reports
and results in electrons mobility above 30 𝑚2 ⁄𝑉 ∙ 𝑠 and ballistic transport on length scale
of many microns28,‎47.
31

S13. Ring-like patterns in scanning gate thermometry due to localized
states
In order to provide qualitative description of the characteristic ring-like patterns in
scanning gate thermometry as seen in Figs. 2, 3, S15, and S16 we performed 3D heat
diffusion simulations using COMSOL. The CNT was modeled as a nanowire in a
substrate with looped form matching the actual shape in Fig. 2d. Due to numerical
limitations the CNT was modeled with a cross section of 5050 nm2 and the heat
conductivity of the CNT (1100 W ⋅ m−1 K −1 for 5 nm diameter CNT [‎48]) was rescaled
accordingly to give an equivalent heat flow along the CNT. Similarly, the graphene was
modelled as 50 nm thick with rescaled heat conductivity equivalent to 2000 W ⋅ m−1 K −1
for thickness of 0.3 nm [‎48] with geometry as in Fig. 3a. The heat conductivity of semiinfinite SiO2 substrate was taken as 0.08 W ⋅ m−1 K −1 [‎49]. The qualitative features
presented below are insensitive to the values of thermal conductivities, which mainly
determine the overall temperature scale.
Figure S13a shows the surface temperature distribution due to dissipation per unit
length in the CNT of 20 pW/µm showing the enhanced temperature along the CNT and
the heat diffusion in the substrate on a typical length scale of 1 µm, similar to the
experimental data in Fig. 2a (in the simulation straight segments of dissipating CNT
extend 7 µm on each side beyond the displayed area). Figure S13b shows the surface
temperature distribution caused by a localized resonant QD state on the CNT (located as
marked by the right blue dot in Fig. S13a), modeled as a region with 20 nm diameter
dissipating 20 pW giving rise to a heat spot diffusing into the substrate. The visible
anisotropic shape of the surface temperature is due to higher heat conductivity along the
CNT. In the case of reduced heat conductivity along the CNT the heat spot will be
isotropic with universal 1/𝑟 decaying temperature profile determined by heat diffusion in
an isotropic substrate. Temperature distribution due to another independent QD is shown
in Fig. S13c.
When the QDs are not in resonance the thermal image acquired by the scanning tSOT
will be described by Fig. S13a. On the other hand, if one of the QDs is at resonance the
excess dissipation will result in a thermal image that is given by the sum of Figs. S13a
and S13b or of Figs. S13a and S13c accordingly. However, the excess dissipation is
present only when the QD is tuned into one of its Coulomb blockade resonances 𝑛 by the
tip potential. This occurs when the tSOT is at some lateral distances 𝑅𝑛 from the QD
(which depends among other things on the scanning height and the tip potential 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 ).
As a result, the excess dissipation in the QD is present only when the tSOT is located
along concentric rings of radius 𝑅𝑛 shown by the green circles in Figs. S13b,c (only a
pair of 𝑅𝑛 rings is shown for each QD for clarity). Each QD will have a different set of
𝑅𝑛 depending on the local potential structure, doping, and the QD capacitance as
observed by scanning gate AFM26,‎50-‎53. The width of the rings is determined by the
broadening of the Coulomb blockade energy levels of the QD and was taken to be 50 nm
in the simulations.
The thermal image attained by the scanning tSOT will therefore be composed as
following. At any location except at the rings, the image will be given by Fig. S13a.
When the tip is on one of the rings of the right QD, however, the QD dissipates and hence
the image will be given by the sum of Figs. S13a and S13b. Similarly, when the tSOT is
32

a

e

b

f

c

g

d

h

Figure S13 | Numerical simulations of thermal ring-like structures due to resonant
states in CNT and graphene. a, Surface temperature distribution 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) due to 20
pW/µm power dissipation in a looped CNT on a SiO2 substrate. b, 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) due to 20 pW
dissipation at a point on the CNT marked in blue in (a). c, Similar 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) due to the left
point heat source marked in (a). d, Surface temperature distribution resulting from adding
𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) values along the green rings in (b) and (c) to 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) of (a). e, Surface
temperature 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) due to 40 pW/µm2 power dissipation in a washer shaped graphene
structure on a SiO2 substrate. f, 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) due to 60 pW dissipation at a point in the
graphene marked in blue in (e). g, Similar 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) due to the heat source at left point
marked in (e). h, Surface temperature attained by adding 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) values along the green
rings in (f) and (g) to 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) of (e).
33

scanned across the left QD, the measured temperature along the green circles will be
given by addition of Figs. S13a and S13c. The resulting combined thermal image is
presented in Fig. S13d providing a qualitative description of the experimental results in
Figs. 2 and S15. The same process is presented in Figs. S13e-h for the case of the
graphene washer on SiO2 substrate, where a heat of 40 pW/µm2 was dissipated uniformly
in the graphene. The resulting surface temperature of the sample is presented in Fig. S13e
showing a uniform temperature in the graphene and a decaying distribution outside the
washer and in the central aperture due to heat diffusing in the substrate, similar to the
experimental data in Figs. 3b and S16. Figures S13f and S13g present the thermal map
due to 60 pW dissipation at localized resonant states on dots with a diameter of 20 nm at
locations indicated by blue dots in Fig. S13e. Similarly to the case of CNT the excess
dissipation at the localized states occurs only when the scanning tip is located at lateral
distance 𝑅 marked by the green circles in Figs. S13f-g. The resulting thermal image
attained by a scanning tSOT will therefore appear as shown in Fig. S13h. As discussed in
section S16, we attribute the localized states to vacancies and adatoms at the graphene
edges, which result in localized states with narrow energy levels pinned near the Dirac
point31. As a result, in contrast to the multiple energy levels in QD in CNT, we expect
only one resonant state in graphene defects, giving rise to a single ring around each
defect. The radius of the ring will vary upon changing the tip potential 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 as observed
experimentally in Fig. S16 and Video S1.

Figure S14 | Numerical simulation of an ensemble of point heat sources in graphene.
Simulation of the surface temperature 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) due to random distribution of point heat
sources along the washer-shaped graphene edges on SiO2 substrate. The locations of the
sources are marked by blue dots with an average density of 3 points/µm, which is sparser
compared to the experimental findings. A power of 60 pW is dissipated at each point,
resulting in a smeared image in which the ability to resolve the individual heat sources is
lost, in contrast to Fig. 3.
34

Even though the ring structures may seem like a measurement artifact, they in fact
provide a powerful spectroscopic tool that allows detection of the QDs or other resonant
dissipative states which would not be possible otherwise. Figure S14 shows the
calculated surface temperature distribution of the graphene washer similar to Fig. S13e in
which instead of a uniform bulk heating all the dissipation arises due to isolated point
heat sources, like in Figs. S13f and g, randomly distributed along the edges with even
sparser average density (3 sources/µm) as compared to the experimental findings of Fig.
3. The resulting 𝛿𝑇(𝑥, 𝑦) shows smooth inhomogeneities due to variations in the local
average density of the point sources, smeared by the long-range heat conductivity, with
essentially no visible signature of the individual sources. The scanning gate ability of the
tSOT, in contrast, allows controllable switching of each of the point sources thus
providing a unique tool for their individual detection and characterization.

S14. Scanning gate thermometry of QD in SWCNT
In addition to the scanning dc gate thermometry demonstrated in Fig. 2 in which the
potential of the tSOT was kept constant while an ac current was applied to the CNT, we
have performed scanning ac gate thermometry with an ac voltage of 80 mV at 130 Hz
applied to the tSOT, while a dc current of 1.7 nA flowed through the CNT device 2. In
this case the heat signal at the excitation frequency is generated only locally due to the
small induced changes in the local conductance, reducing the background signal due to
the overall ac heating of the CNT observed in Figs. 2a and 2b. Figures S15a-c present the
𝑇𝑎𝑐 images produced by this technique at three different heights ℎ of the tSOT above a
CNT segment marked by square in Fig. 2e. The height ℎ was incremented by 2 nm
between the images. As expected, the diameter of the Coulomb blockade rings of the
QDs grows with ℎ. Clearly the ring structure is far from circular. In all cases, the short
axis of the asphericity of the rings is aligned with the direction of the CNT; a feature that
may be explained by partial screening of the tSOT potential by neighboring QDs along
the CNT. In addition, during the scan of Fig. S15b an abrupt change occurred, causing
some rings to shrink by one period while other rings remained unchanged (scans are
along vertical lines from right to left). This observation reveals instability, typical for
QDs, in which the charge of one QD is abruptly changed without affecting the rest of the
QDs, demonstrating the ability of scanning gate thermometry to resolve changes in
dissipation arising from variations in single electron occupancy of a QD.

35

Figure S15 | Thermal imaging by scanning ac gate thermometry of quantum dot
dissipation in SWCNT. a-c, 𝑇𝑎𝑐 images of a segment along CNT device 2 (marked by
square in Fig. 2e) arising from changes in QDs dissipation induced by an ac potential
applied to the tSOT in presence of dc current of 1.7 nA in the CNT. The height of the
tSOT above the CNT was increased by 2 nm between the consecutive images, starting
from about 15 nm in (a), resulting in expansion of the Coulomb blockade rings. During
scan (b) an abrupt jump in the charge occupancy of one of the QDs occurred without
affecting the dissipation in other QDs. Pixel size 1.8 nm and scan speed 10 nm/s.

S15. Scanning gate thermometry of hBN/graphene/hBN device
We employed three schemes for scanning gate thermometry of the graphene device,
one dc scheme and two additional ac schemes introduced to enhance contrast. In the
simplest scheme a dc current of 6 μA is driven through the structure and the
corresponding 𝛿𝑇𝑑𝑐 image is acquired by the tSOT as shown in Fig. S16a, which presents
a zoomed-in view of the inner aperture of the washer-shaped device. The applied current
raises the temperature in the graphene region relative to the inner graphene-free region
outlined by the red dotted circle. In addition to the smooth temperature background in
graphene, a neckless of small ring-like structures of enhanced temperature with a radius
of up to about 𝑅 = 150 nm is clearly visible along the edge of the graphene. Since the
temperature increase at the rings is relatively small compared to the background
temperature we employ two schemes in order to enhance their visibility.
In the first ac–enhanced imaging mode we make use of the fact that the tSOT is
mounted on a tuning fork (TF, see section S8 for more information). We excite the TF at
its resonant frequency of 36.694 kHz with an rms amplitude of |𝑢
⃗ | =5 nm and measure
the resulting ac signal using a lock-in amplifier. The ac displacement of the tSOT gives
rise to an ac signal 𝑇𝑎𝑐 = 𝑢
⃗ ∙ 𝛻𝑇𝑑𝑐 which reflects the gradient of 𝛿𝑇𝑑𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑦) along 𝑢̂ – the
direction of the TF oscillations, that were oriented at 30 deg with respect to the 𝑥 axis, as
indicated by the arrow in Fig. S16b. In the resulting 𝑢̂ ∙ 𝛻𝑇𝑑𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑦) gradient image in Fig.
S16b, which was acquired simultaneously with the 𝛿𝑇𝑑𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑦) image in Fig. S16a, the
smoothly varying background is suppressed, while the sharp ring-like features are
enhanced, thus facilitating a more detailed analysis of their behavior. The obtained image
exhibits red and blue features due to positive and negative temperature gradient at the
inner and outer sides of the dc rings.
36

a

b

c

Figure S16 | Evolution of circular scanning gate thermometry signatures of resonant
dissipation in graphene. The Back-gate of the graphene device of Fig. 3 was tuned to a
fixed carrier concentration of 1.5 ∙ 1012 cm-2. A dc current of 6 μA flows from top to
bottom similarly to Fig. 3. The tSOT scans 20 nm above the structure to image the inner
hole of the structure presented in Fig. 3. The tSOT gating voltage was swept to create a
series of thermal maps. a, A typical thermal map for a given tSOT gating voltage. The
warm bright rings on the edge of the structure are clearly visible. b, When locked to the
tuning-fork frequency of 36.694 kHz, one simultaneously gets a spatial derivative of the
thermal map along the vibration axis (indicated by a unit vector u in the images) with an
improved contrast. Two representing tSOT gate voltages are presented (b-c). The
structure edge is marked by a dashed line. A full video of the evolution of the patterns is
provided as well (Video S1). Pixel size 18.7 nm and time constant 3 ms.
Using this ac-enhanced imaging mode we obtain a behavior of the rings with varying
the tip-sample bias voltage 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 , as illustrated in Figs. S16b,c and Video S1. The backgate voltage was fixed at -2.5 V yielding carrier concentration of 1.5 ∙ 1012 cm-2 and a
series of images were acquired at different values of 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 using a 100 nm diameter tSOT
scanning at a height of 20 nm above the hBN/graphene/hBN structure. The Video S1
shows that upon increasing 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 rings start to appear at various locations along the edge
of graphene and their radii grow as the tip bias increases consistent with the numerical
simulations in section S13.
As described in the main text, we attribute this behavior to the presence of localized
electronic resonance states at adatoms and vacancies positioned at the exposed etched
edges of the graphene. Recent studies have shown that these defects can indeed give rise
to localized resonant states that are pinned in energy close to the Dirac point32,‎54-‎56. When
a negative back gate is applied these localized states reside well above the Fermi energy
and therefore cannot trap the hot carriers that have characteristic energies only slightly
above 𝐸𝐹 . By placing the tip directly above the defect and increasing 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 the energy
level of the localized state is shifted towards 𝐸𝐹 and comes into resonance with the hot
electrons at 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 = 𝑉𝑐 . At this bias value a heat spot will be formed at the defect below
the tip as a result of electron-lattice cooling bottleneck relieved through the defect
37

resonances. Under these conditions the hot carriers, trapped on the localized resonance
states, release their excess energy through electron-phonon coupling enhanced by the
localized states.
As 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 is further increased the energy level of the localized state is shifted to below
𝐸𝐹 and thus goes out of resonance with hot electrons. However, in this situation where
𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 > 𝑉𝑐 , the resonant conditions of the defect state can be restored by reducing the tipinduced potential by moving the tip a distance 𝑅 away from the defect. In this case a ring
of enhanced temperature of radius 𝑅 in the 𝛿𝑇𝑑𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑦) images will be observed as in Fig.
S16. Additional increase in 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 requires moving the tip further away from the defect.
Hence, the radius 𝑅 of the rings grows with 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 as shown in Video S1. The value of 𝑉𝑐
should depend on the specific structure of the defect and its environment and is hence
expected to be location dependent. As a result, the onset of the ring formation should
vary from one defect to another. Thus for a given 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 a distribution of ring sizes should
be observed, consistent with our experimental findings. Nevertheless, the various defects
show similar behavior indicating a common nature of the localized states.
Since the ring radius 𝑅 grows with 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 , we can use an alternative ac-enhanced
mode to improve the ring contrast. Adding a small ac component to 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 will result in a
small periodic expansion and shrinkage of the ring giving rise to a 𝑇𝑎𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑦) image in
which the rings appear with bright and dark outlines. Figure 3b was acquired using this
scheme of scanning gate thermometry with tip ac voltage of 200 mV at 843 Hz. The
results obtained by all three scanning modes are found to be in good agreement with each
other.

S16. Supplementary Video S1: Scanning gate thermometry of
hBN/graphene/hBN device
Video S1 presents a sequence of ac images of the inner aperture of the washer-shaped
graphene device acquired by the tSOT as a function of the potential 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 between the tip
and the sample. The images present the gradient of the local temperature 𝑢̂ ∙ 𝛻𝑇𝑑𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑦)
produced by measuring the ac signal of the tSOT due to the ac vibration of the TF with
an rms amplitude of 5 nm along 𝑢̂ at 36.694 kHz as described in section S16 above.
Figures S16b,c present two frames from the video. New ring-like structures are formed
along the graphene edge and expand as 𝑉𝑡𝑆𝑂𝑇 is increased as discussed in sections S13
and S16.

References
34. Finkler, A. et al. Scanning superconducting quantum interference device on a tip for
magnetic imaging of nanoscale phenomena, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 83, 073702 (2012).
35. Huber, M. E. et al. DC SQUID series array amplifiers with 120 MHz bandwidth, IEEE
Trans. Appl. Supercond. 11, 4048–4053 (2001).
36. Ovadia, M., Kalok, D., Sacépé, B. & Shahar, D. Duality symmetry and its breakdown in the
vicinity of the superconductor–insulator transition, Nature Physics 9, 415–418 (2013).
37. Pollack, G. L. Kapitza resistance, Review of modern physics 41, 48–81 (1969).

38

38. Mate, C. F. & Sawyer, S. P. Kapitza effect in gaseous helium, Phys. Rev. Lett. 20, 834–837
(1968).
39. Kennard, E. H. Kinetic theory of gases (McGraw-Hill book co. Inc. New York, 1938), p.
314.
40. Worbes, L., Hellmann, D. and Kittel, A., Enhanced Near-Field Heat Flow of a Monolayer
Dielectric Island, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 134302 (2013).
41. Jeong, W., Kim, K., Kim, Y., Lee, W. and Reddy, P., Characterization of nanoscale
temperature fields during electromigration of nanowires. Sci. Rep. 4, 4975 (2014).
42. Meschke, M., Guichard, W. & Pekola, J. P. Single-mode heat conduction by photons. Nature
444, 187–190 (2006).
43. Jezouin, S. et al. Quantum limit of heat flow across a single electronic channel, Science 342,
601-604 (2013).
44. Horowitz, M. Silvidi, A. A. Malaker, S.F & Daunt, J. G. The specific heat of lead in the
temperature range 1K to 75K, Phys. Rev. B 88, 1182-1186 (1952).
45. Kretinin, A.V. et al. Electronic properties of graphene encapsulated with different twodimensional atomic crystals, Nano Letters 14, 3270-3276 (2014).
46. Ben Shalom, M., et al. Quantum oscillations of the critical current and high-field
superconducting proximity in ballistic graphene, Nature Physics (2015).
47. Mayorov, A.S., Micrometer-scale ballistic transport in encapsulated graphene at room
temperature, Nano Letters, 11, 2396-2399 (2011).
48. Balandin, A. A., Thermal properties of graphene and nanostructured carbon materials,
Nature Materials 10, 569-581 (2011).
49. Zeller, R. C. & Pohl, R. O. Thermal conductivity and specific heat of noncrystalline solids,
Phys. Rev. B 4, 2029-2041 (1971).
50. Xue, J., Dhall, R., Cronin, S.B. and LeRoy, B. J., Scanning gate microscopy of ultra clean
carbon nanotube quantum dots. arXiv:1508.05462 (2015).
51. Garcia, A. G. F., Konig, M., Goldhaber-Gordon, D. and Todd, K., Scanning gate microscopy
of localized states in wide graphene constrictions, Phys. Rev. B 87, 085446 (2013).
52. Schnez, S., Güttinger, J., Stampfer, C., Ensslin, K. and Ihn, T., The relevance of
electrostatics for scanning-gate microscopy, New Journal of Physics 13, 053013 (2011).
53. Huefner, M. et al., Spatial mapping and manipulation of two tunnel-coupled quantum dots,
Phys. Rev. B 83, 235326 (2011).
54. Mao, J. et al., Realization of a tunable artificial atom at a supercritically charged vacancy in
graphene. Nature Physics (2016).
55. Ugeda, M. M., Brihuega, I., Guinea, F., and Gómez-Rodríguez, J. M., Missing atom as a
source of carbon magnetism. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 096804 (2010).
56. Ugeda, M. M. et al., Point defects on graphene on metals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 116803
(2011).
39

