Diode effect in Shapiro steps in an asymmetric SQUID with a superconducting
nanobridge
Dmitrii S. Kalashnikov,1, ∗ Gleb S. Seleznev,2, 1, † Andrei Kudriashov,1 Ian Babich,1
Denis Yu. Vodolazov,1, 3 Yakov V. Fominov,2, 1, 4 and Vasily S. Stolyarov1, 5, 6, ‡
1

Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, 141700 Dolgoprudny, Russia
L. D. Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics RAS, 142432 Chernogolovka, Russia
3
Institute for Physics of Microstructures, Russian Academy of Sciences, 603950, Nizhny Novgorod, GSP-105, Russia
4
Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, HSE University, 101000 Moscow, Russia
5
National University of Science and Technology MISIS, 119049 Moscow, Russia
6
Dukhov Research Institute of Automatics (VNIIA), 127055 Moscow, Russia

arXiv:2510.15526v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 17 Oct 2025

2

We investigate the Josephson diode effect in an asymmetric SQUID consisting of a sinusoidal
Josephson junction formed by a Bi2 Te2 Se flake and a superconducting Nb nanobridge with a linear
and multivalued current-phase relation (CPR). Current-voltage characteristics were measured both
in the absence (dc regime) and presence (ac regime) of external microwave irradiation. Our dc
measurements reveal only weak critical current asymmetry (i.e. weak Josephson diode effect), while
confirming the multivalued behavior of the SQUID. At the same time, the key finding of this work
is the observation of strong Shapiro step asymmetry (concerning the dc current direction) in the
ac regime at finite magnetic flux. This peculiarity oscillates as a function of magnetic field with
the SQUID’s periodicity and varies non-monotonically with the increase in microwave power. Our
theoretical model shows that the pronounced Shapiro step asymmetry, despite the small diode effect
in critical current, arises from the interplay between the sinusoidal and multivalued CPRs of the
junctions.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Traditionally, a diode is an electronic device that allows current to flow in only one direction while blocking
it in the opposite direction. Its semiconductor implementations, based on p − n junctions, are widely used in
various applications, making them essential components
in modern electronics [1]. Recently, there has been growing interest in superconducting diodes, driven by both
fundamental research and potential applications in superconducting electronics [2–4].
The key characteristic of the superconducting diode effect (SDE) is the asymmetry of the critical current magnitude with respect to the current direction. There are
various approaches to achieve this effect, which typically
require broken time-reversal and inversion symmetries.
This can be accomplished by introducing external magnetic fields in systems exhibiting spin-orbit interaction or
by using topological and noncentrosymmetric materials
[5–21]. Moreover, the SDE can be caused by the vortex motion in systems with edge [22–27] or bulk [28–32]
natural/artificial defects.
One possible approach is to examine the SDE in systems that include Josephson junctions (JJs), where it
is referred to as the Josephson diode effect (JDE) [33–
47]. The simplest setups for investigating the JDE are
multiterminal systems and asymmetric SQUIDs using
multiple sinusoidal Josephson junctions as their building

∗ kalashnikov.ds@phystech.edu
† seleznev.gs@phystech.edu
‡ stolyarov.vs@phystech.edu

blocks [48–50]. These setups also provide a convenient
way to tune both the strength and sign of the effect by
varying the external magnetic fluxes through the loops.
An alternative approach is to employ JJs with nonsinusoidal CPRs [51–56]. In this regard, superconducting
nanobridges emerge as particularly promising candidates
owing to their nearly linear, multivalued CPRs, which
significantly distinguish them from ordinary sinusoidal
junctions [57–61]. Additionally, these devices are characterized by their small size and easy fabrication process
[62, 63]. However, despite extensive investigations of superconducting nanobridges [64–67], particularly regarding the observation of the diode effect [68–70], the influence of the multivalued nature of the nanobridge CPR on
the peculiarities of the JDE has not yet been explored.
Another interesting approach to study the superconducting diode effect involves exploring quantities beyond
just the asymmetry of critical currents. Although this
phenomenon is the most prominent manifestation of the
SDE, other parts of the current-voltage characteristics
(CVC) also exhibit asymmetric behavior. For example, when capacitive effects are present, the JDE manifests as an asymmetry in the retrapping currents [71–74].
Moreover, under external irradiation, features known as
Shapiro steps appear in the CVC when the internal voltage oscillations of the system synchronize with the external driving alternating signal [75, 76]. The Shapiro steps
can also demonstrate the JDE revealed in the asymmetry between shapes and sizes of the negative and positive steps (corresponding to different current directions)
[51, 52, 74, 77–80]. However, the asymmetries mentioned
above require specific conditions, such as the presence of
effective capacitance of the junctions forming the SQUID
(for the asymmetry of the retrapping currents) or the ap-

2
plication of microwave irradiation (for the asymmetry of
the Shapiro steps). As a result, observing these effects
is a more challenging task and has received less attention. At the same time, asymmetries in various parts
of the CVC may reflect distinct features of the system
(e.g., static and dynamic properties) and can exhibit entirely different behavior. Consequently, investigating the
various asymmetric features of the CVC can provide additional valuable insights into the system.
In our work, we study an asymmetric SQUID composed of a sinusoidal Josephson junction and a superconducting nanobridge. Our focus is on the peculiarities of
the JDE arising from the interplay between single-valued
and multivalued Josephson junctions. We demonstrate
that this interplay manifests itself in a strong asymmetry
of the Shapiro features, which can be more pronounced
than the asymmetry of the critical current.
The paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we
describe the experimental sample and the corresponding theoretical model for static superconducting properties of the asymmetric SQUID with a superconducting
nanobridge. In Sec. III, we present experimental results
and theoretical analysis of the SQUID current-voltage
characteristics, measured both without (critical current
measurements) and with (Shapiro steps measurements)
microwave irradiation. In Sec. IV, we analyze the dependence of the Shapiro steps asymmetry on the magnetic
flux and microwave irradiation power. In Sec. V, we discuss the observed asymmetric features and the physical
mechanisms underlying them. In Sec. VI, we present our
conclusions. Finally, additional details regarding calculations and auxiliary measurement results are provided
in the Appendices.

II. ASYMMETRIC SQUID WITH
SUPERCONDUCTING NANOBRIDGE
A.

Josephson junctions

In our work, we study the asymmetric SQUID, whose
electrodes are made from thick niobium (d ≈ 100 nm)
and whose arms contain two strongly different weak
links. A SEM image of the SQUID is shown in Fig. 1(a)
and a simplified scheme of the system is presented in
Fig. 1(b). The first junction of the SQUID is an SNS
Josephson junction formed by a Bi2 Te2 Se flake with a
thickness of about 90 nm. Similar samples using the
same material were investigated in Ref. [81], where it
was found that the flake acts as a normal metal and the
junction has a standard sinusoidal current-phase relation
ISNS (φa ) = Isns sin φa . The junction has large lateral dimensions, and its area Ssns is comparable to the area of
the superconducting loop Sloop . Therefore, when analyzing the SQUID, we account for the non zero magnetic
flux through the junction in an applied magnetic field.
As a result, the critical current of the SNS junction exhibits Fraunhofer modulation in the presence of a mag-

FIG. 1.
Asymmetric SQUID structure.
(a) Falsecolored Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) image of the
sample. The top junction is a Superconductor/Normal
metal/Superconductor (SNS) Josephson junction formed by a
Bi2 Te2 Se flake, and the bottom one is a niobium nanobridge
(NB). (b) An equivalent scheme of the SQUID with two different Josephson junctions. The insets show their current-phase
relations (CPRs): sinusoidal function for the SNS junction
and linear multivalued function for the nanobridge, where the
critical current Inb corresponds to the critical phase φc > π.
In the nonstationary state with finite average voltage (positive or negative), the nanobridge CPR takes a sawtooth form,
shown by red and blue segments, respectively. External radiofrequency (rf ) irradiation can be applied to the SQUID.

sns /Φ0 )
netic field, following Isns (Φ) = Isns sin(πΦ
(πΦsns /Φ0 ) , where
the flux Φsns penetrating the SNS junction is proportional to the magnetic flux Φ through the superconducting loop as Φsns = ΦSsns /Sloop .
The second junction is a superconducting nanobridge
made of a thin film of niobium with a thickness of 20 nm,
a width of 220 nm, and a length of 380 nm. Its CPR
INB (φb ) is assumed to be multivalued, which is typical

3
for superconducting nanobridges with small cross sections [57–61, 67]. Generally, in the stationary regime
(S state), the CPR of a JJ can be generated by a single
branch defined in the interval [−φc , φc ] and periodically
translated by 2πn, where n is an integer. A conventional
single-valued CPR corresponds to φc = π. At the same
time, in the nanobridge case, the generating branch is
linear and φc > π. This leads to the multivaluedness
of the CPR with n enumerating its different branches.
For the nanobridge, the critical phase also corresponds
to the critical current Inb . In the nonstationary regime
(R-state) with finite average voltage (positive or negative), we suppose that INB (φb ) effectively takes a sawtooth form [82–85]. Every time the phase reaches the
value ±φc + 2πn, it switches to the neighboring branch,
n 7→ n ± 1. The two signs correspond to the red and blue
vertical segments in Fig. 1(b), respectively.
This behavior of the nanobridge can alsoH be understood in terms of vorticity defined as Nv = ∇φdl/2π,
where the integration is performed around the loop
perimeter and φ is the superconducting phase. Different branches of the CPR are distinguished by an integer n, which equals the vorticity Nv at zero phase drop
across the junction. As we increase the phase across the
junction, fluxes can penetrate the SQUID loop, resulting in a change in the vorticity by one. Because of the
nanobridge significant length, the phase gradient along
it is small, leading to a correspondingly small superconducting velocity. Therefore, many vortices can enter the
loop before the nanobridge reaches its critical current,
which occurs at Nv ≫ 1 or equivalently at φc ≫ π (for
theoretical estimation of φc , see Appendix A). Moreover,
once the phase reaches its critical value, a phase slip occurs in the nanobridge, causing a phase drop of 2π. This
is formally equivalent to changing n by one, as mentioned
earlier.

B.

Current-phase relation of the SQUID

As two weak links are connected by a superconducting loop, the phase shift ϕ between them is related to
the magnetic flux Φ through this loop as ϕ = φa − φb =
2πΦ/Φ0 , where Φ0 is the magnetic flux quantum. We neglect the loop self-inductance, which is small in our case
(see Appendix B). At the same time, the supercurrent
flowing through the SQUID is given by the sum of the
junctions’ supercurrents,
Is (φ) = Isns (ϕ) sin(φ + ϕ) + INB (φ),

(1)

where we take into account the Fraunhofer modulation
of the SNS critical current mentioned earlier. The asymmetry of the junctions forming the SQUID leads to the
appearance of the JDE in our system.
To highlight the unique features associated with the
presence of a superconducting nanobridge, we express the
supercurrent of the SQUID in the R state as a Fourier

series
∞
X

Is (φ)
= A0± +
Ak± sin k(φ + δk± ) ,
Inb

(2)

k=1

where ± sign indicates positive and negative part of the
sawtooth CPR (red and blue, respectively). The zeroth
harmonics A0± = ±(φc −π)/φc arise from the nanobridge
CPR and determine the average supercurrent. The amplitudes Ak± and phases δk± at k = 1 are given by the
following equations:
s
2
4
4Isns (ϕ)
Isns (ϕ)
+ 2−
cos (ϕ ± φc ),
A1± =
Inb
φc
Inb φc
(3)
sin (ϕ ± φc )
tan (δ1± ± φc ) =
, (4)
cos (ϕ ± φc ) − 2Inb /φc Isns (ϕ)
while Ak± = −2/kφc and δk± = ∓φc for k > 1.
As shown by Eqs. (2)–(4), there are two different mechanisms leading to the diode effect. The first is the amplitude asymmetry of the first harmonic A1+ ̸= A1− at
sin φc sin ϕ ̸= 0. Visually, sin φc ̸= 0 corresponds to the
horizontal offset between red and blue sawtooth patterns
in Fig. 1(b). The second mechanism involves phase shifts
between the first and higher Josephson harmonics, where
δ1± ̸= δk± at least for some k > 1. While the phase-shift
mechanism of the JDE in SQUIDs is well known [51, 52],
the amplitude-asymmetry mechanism has not been previously reported to our knowledge. This asymmetry stems
from the interference between the sinusoidal CPR and
the first harmonic of the nanobridge sawtooth CPR. Notably, this effect is not present in SQUIDs that consist
solely of junctions with single-valued CPRs because of
trivial values of the critical phase, sin φc = 0. Therefore,
it highlights the multivalued nature of the nanobridge
CPR. As we demonstrate below, the A1+ ̸= A1− asymmetry drives the pronounced Shapiro steps asymmetry
observed in the nonstationary regime.

III.

CURRENT-VOLTAGE CHARACTERISTICS

We begin the discussion of the experimental results
with the analysis of the CVC of the SQUID. Figure 2(a)
shows a typical example of an IV curve observed in the
experiment. As long as the voltage is zero, the SQUID
is in the S state. When the applied current exceeds a
critical value Ic , the voltage changes abruptly, the CVC
becomes linear, and the SQUID switches into the R state.
When the current decreases back, the voltage remains finite even for current values less than the critical value.
It drops back to zero only at a smaller value Ir , manifesting hysteretic behavior of the system. This hysteretic behavior is associated with local overheating of the sample
caused by Joule dissipation [86, 87] and not by capacitive effects. In particular, the temperature effectively

4

FIG. 2. Direct current measurements of the sample. (a) CVC of the SQUID measured at temperature T = 50 mK and in an
external magnetic field B = 0.8 G. The black arrows indicate the current sweep direction. The hysteretic behavior of the curve
is associated with local overheating. The inset shows a zoomed area of the IV curve around the critical currents in absolute
values of current and voltage. The critical currents differ in opposite directions by around 4 µA. (b) Dependence of Ic of the
SQUID on the external magnetic field in positive and negative current directions. The critical currents in both directions
slightly differ from each other, which is a manifestation of the diode effect. A set of CVCs was measured at a fixed value
of magnetic field, and the dots indicate the critical current obtained from each CVC. As can be seen, at a given magnetic
field, the dots concentrate around several values of the critical current, demonstrating the multivalued CPR of the SQUID.
Different critical currents correspond to switching to the resistive state from different branches of the CPR. The dashed lines
represent fits to the two branches of the multivalued Ic (B) curve for the positive critical currents with Eqs. (5) and (6). The
line labeled Ic max corresponds to the highest branch (with the largest critical current value), while Ic2 represents the lower
(second) possible critical current branch at a fixed magnetic field. (c) Dependence of the highest branch of the positive critical
current over a wide range of fields. The small-scale oscillations of Ic (B) (because of the flux through the whole SQUID) are
modulated by the Fraunhofer dependence of the critical current through the SNS junction, shown by the dashed line. The right
panels demonstrate the temperature dependence of (d) the SNS critical current Isns , (e) nanobridge critical current Inb and (f)
critical phase φc . Theoretical fits at high temperature are shown by dashed lines.

changes from T = 50 mK in the S state (fixed base refrigerator temperature) to T ∼ 2 K near Ir in the R
state. This temperature is estimated from the condition
that the transition from the R to S state corresponds
to the equality between the T -dependent critical current
and the applied dc current.

A.

Critical current measurements

To investigate the diode effect in the critical currents,
we conducted dc measurements at finite magnetic fields.
The IV curve in Fig. 2(a) was measured at an external
magnetic field of 0.8 G. The inset shows that the critical
currents in the positive (Ic+ ) and negative (Ic− ) directions differ by approximately 4 µA.
For a detailed analysis of this asymmetry, we measured
the critical current dependence on magnetic field over a
wide range. The low-field results are shown in Fig. 2(b).
We measured 100 CVCs at given magnetic field values
to obtain critical current statistics. The procedure of
collecting statistics is important in our case because the
transition to the R state may occur at different currents
at the same magnetic field, see Fig. 2(b). This effect
arises from the existence of different vorticity states at
the same value of magnetic field, which is a manifestation

of the multivalued nature of the nanobridge CPR. Similar
effects were previously observed in asymmetric SQUIDs
with two different nanobridges [67, 68]. At the same time,
the results for higher magnetic fields are presented in
Fig. 2(c). In this case, magnetic fluxes penetrate the SNS
junction, inducing Fraunhofer-like modulation of SQUID
oscillations.
We fit the Ic (B) dependence in Figs. 2(b) and (c) simultaneously maximizing the absolute value of the supercurrent given by Eq. (1). As demonstrated earlier
in Ref. [81], the phase values at which critical currents
are reached
can 
be either ±φc or φ∗± = ±2πNv± ±

nb
arccos − φc IIsns
(ϕ)

− ϕ, which correspond to the max-

imum/minimum positions (numerated by integer vorticity numbers Nv± ) within the range [−φc , φc ] (for more
details, see Appendix C).
When critical currents are reached at the ±φc , they
take the following values
Ic± = Inb + Isns (ϕ) sin(φc ± ϕ),

(5)

which corresponds to the steep (almost vertical) segments
in the Ic (B) dependence in Fig. 2(b).
Conversely, when critical currents are reached at φ∗± ,

5

FIG. 3. SQUID measurements under radio-frequency (rf) irradiation at Φ = 3Φ0 /4. (a) Comparison between IV curves of
the SQUID with applied microwave irradiation at frequency frf = 2.888 GHz (solid red) and without it (blue dashed line). (b)
Zoomed area of the backward branch of the IV curve near Ir with applied microwave irradiation. The lines bend slightly at the
voltages Vn = (n − 1/2)V0 with integer n and V0 = Φ0 frf , shown by dashed gray lines. (c) The same data as in panel (b) but
with the horizontal axis representing the calculated differential resistance R = dV /dI. The voltage is now expressed in units of
V0 . (d) Dependence of the differential resistance on the backward branches vs current through the sample and rf power near
Ir± .

they are given by the expression
s

2
Inb
Ic± = Isns (ϕ) 1 −
φc Isns (ϕ)




Inb
Inb
+
2πNv± + arccos −
∓ϕ ,
φc
φc Isns (ϕ)


(6)

which corresponds to the not-so-steep linear segments in
Fig. 2(b). According to this expression, there are multiple critical current values at the fixed magnetic field,
distinguished by the vorticity number Nv± . In Fig. 2(b)
Ic max corresponds to the highest branch (with the largest
critical current value), while Ic2 represents the lower (second) critical current branch. The Ic2 branch does not
align perfectly with the experimental data, likely because
of a slight deviation of the nanobridge CPR from ideal
linearity assumed in the theory.
Nevertheless, our theoretical model successfully reproduces the overall shapes of the experimentally measured
Ic (B) curves. At the same time, we emphasize that our
theory does not account for the apparent “discontinuities” in the Ic (B) dependence, which manifest themselves in the absence of experimental points in some
segments of the experimental curve. These discontinuities are attributed to stochastic switching from different
vorticity states to the R state and the metastability of
these vorticity states, as previously discussed in Ref. [66].
However, these effects are not the focus of our research.
To evaluate the strength of the diode effect in the dc
regime, we calculate the diode efficiency, η = |(Ic+ −
Ic− )|/(Ic+ + Ic− ), considering only branches with the
largest Ic± values at fixed magnetic field. In our system, the diode efficiency reaches its maximum value
of η = 2.6%, which corresponds to ≈ 4 µA difference.

Hence, our measurements reveal only weak asymmetry
in the critical currents despite the high asymmetry of
the junctions. This can be explained by vorticity. Indeed, critical currents of the SQUID are reached in the
vicinities of ±φc , which corresponds to Nv± ≫ 1 vortices
trapped inside the loop. At the same time, vorticities
differ by one at Ic± (B). Therefore, the difference in critical currents is approximately ∆Ic ∼ Inb (2π/φc ) which is
close to the experimental value of 4 µA and small because
of the large value of φc [see Fig. 2(f)].

Finally, in addition to studying the critical current
asymmetry, we applied the fitting procedure described
above to the set of measurements at different temperatures. This allows us to extract the temperature dependencies of the main parameters of the system, which
are shown in Figs. 2(d)–2(f) (for more details, see Appendix D). The critical currents of both JJs vanish at
temperatures significantly lower than the critical temperature of the niobium electrodes, which is approximately 8 K. We relate the low critical temperature of
the nanobridge to its small thickness (20 nm) and the
fabrication technique: The film was produced using the
thermal sputtering method, resulting in numerous defects
and high oxidation of the niobium. At the same time, for
the SNS junction, we attribute the reduced critical temperature to the fact that the Josephson coupling occurs
not directly between the niobium electrodes. Instead,
it emerges between flake regions beneath the electrodes,
where only weak proximity-induced superconductivity is
present. This effect was previously investigated in Ref.
[88] for similar flakes.

6

FIG. 4. Demonstration of the diode effect in Shapiro features (thermally smeared steps) in magnetic field, which reveal
themselves as minima of R = dV /dI. (a) Five plots of the differential resistance R dependence as a function of voltage at
different magnetic fields. The data are obtained by numerically differentiating experimentally measured IV curves with applied
microwave irradiation at frf = 3.754 GHz and power Prf = 1 mW. The red and blue lines correspond to the positive and
negative current Idc through the SQUID, respectively. The dashed gray lines indicate the reference value R0 . (b) Results of
the theoretical calculations within the RSJ model [Eqs. (7) and (8)] with T = 1.8 K, φc = 30, Isns = 0.3 µA, Inb = 12 µA,
Iac = 12 µA. The theory qualitatively reproduces the experimentally observed features. However, the horizontal axis in the
theoretical subplots had to be manually shifted by 1/2, see Appendix E for discussion.

B.

Shapiro steps measurements

In addition to measuring the CVC without external irradiation, we also explore the unique effects that occur
when microwave irradiation is applied to the sample. We
conducted our experiments at different frequencies in the
2.8–3.8 GHz range and observed qualitatively similar behavior. Figure 3 shows an example of a change in the
SQUID IV curve under such conditions with rf frequency
frf = 2.888 GHz. As expected, the critical current decreases, since an alternating current is added to the direct current. However, Shapiro steps are not formed on
the forward current sweep branch; instead, the system
jumps directly into a normal state. One reason of is the
large self-heating effect, which suppresses superconducting properties. The second reason is the large voltage
values [see red and blue vertical segments that lie outside
the gray box in Fig. 3(a)], which correspond to the large
numbers of Shapiro features characterized by small sizes
and strong thermal smearing, making them unobservable
in the experiment. Therefore, we take a closer look at the
reverse R branch near Ir shown in Fig. 3(b) where the

effective temperature and voltage values are significantly
lower. In this part of the CVC, we observe synchronization of the JJs with external electromagnetic irradiation
similar to those explored in Refs. [83, 89]. However, in
our measurements, the observed peculiarities on the IV
curve do not form clear steps but rather smeared features, which are caused by thermal fluctuations. That
is why we address them as Shapiro features instead of
Shapiro steps. This effect is clearly visible in the differential resistance dependence, plotted in Fig. 3(c), which
demonstrates periodic dips of about 30% of the maximum value. These features occur at periodic intervals
of V0 = 6.0 µV, corresponding to the frequency of the
applied irradiation frf = 2.888 GHz. However, all stripes
are located at voltages V0 (n−1/2) with integer n demonstrating a shift of V0 /2 from the expected positions (for
the discussion of possible reasons, see Appendix E).
The evolution of the differential resistance with rf
power is shown in Fig. 3(d). The dark blue region corresponds to the S state of the SQUID. Its border represents
the critical current Ir of the backward branch of the CVC,
which monotonically decreases with RF power. The blue

7
stripes in the R state correspond to the Shapiro features
that change their positions along the current axis, but
remain at the same voltages throughout the entire power
range. Another notable feature is the abrupt disappearance of the critical currents Ir± as a function of Prf [upper
border of blue region in Fig 3(d)]. In this region, where
Prf ≳ 0.5 dBm, the superconducting properties are still
present, which are manifested by the Shapiro features [see
Fig. 8(f) below]. Similar peculiarities were previously observed in Refs. [89–91] where they were attributed to the
heating effect caused by microwave irradiation. However,
in our research, we do not focus on this region of Prf .
To investigate the JDE in the Shapiro features, we
measure them in different magnetic fields. Figure 4(a)
shows the evolution of differential resistance as the magnetic flux through the SQUID changes. At zero field,
the Rdiff (V ) dependencies are nearly identical for both
current directions. Their minor difference is caused by a
slight deviation of the magnetic field from zero in the
experiment. With increasing field, the R(V ) dips on
the positive current branch become smaller in amplitude,
while on the negative branch they increase. Their asymmetry reaches a maximum at Φ = Φ0 /4. Then, the process is reversed, and at Φ0 /2 the curves coincide again.
At 3Φ0 /4, the difference reaches the maximum again but
with the opposite diode effect sign. Finally, at Φ0 the
state of the SQUID becomes indistinguishable from the
state at zero flux, so the curves coincide again.
In this way, we demonstrate that the amplitude of differential resistance dips differs between the positive and
negative current directions, which is one of the manifestations of the JDE. The diode effect reaches its maximum
at magnetic fluxes Φ ≈ Φ0 /4 and Φ ≈ 3Φ0 /4, where the
Shapiro features nearly vanish for one current direction
while remaining distinctly visible for the opposite direction. This observation highlights a strong asymmetry in
the Shapiro features, contrasting with the relatively weak
asymmetry observed in the critical currents measured in
the absence of microwave irradiation.
To confirm that the observed asymmetry of the Shapiro
steps is caused by the asymmetric structure of the
SQUID, we numerically simulate the phase dynamics using the RSJ model [75, 76] with the supercurrent given
by Eq. (1),
dφ/dτ + Is (φ)/Inb = jdc + jac cos ωτ + ξ(τ ),
v = dφ/dτ,

(7)
(8)

where we define the dimensionless variables: τ = ωJ t,
v = V /Inb R, jdc = Idc /Inb , jac = Iac /Inb , ξ = If /Inb ,
and ω = Ω/ωJ . Here, Idc and Iac represent the dc and ac
currents, respectively, If is the fluctuating thermal current, Ω is the frequency of the ac current, R0 = 3.6 Ω is
the normal resistance taken from the experiment (see Table I for sample N7 which is the main object of our study),
and ωJ = (2e/ℏ)Inb R0 is the Josephson frequency. The
thermal fluctuations in Eq. (7) are considered as white
noise with correlator ⟨ξ(τ )ξ(τ ′ )⟩ = 2T δ(τ − τ ′ ) and dimensionless temperature T = 2eT /ℏInb . While the tem-

perature generally varies along the IV curve because of
the Joule heating, it can be treated as constant within
narrow intervals of V /V0 .
As a result, we obtain the CVC, v(jdc ) dependence,
where . . . indicates time-averaging. The comparison of
theoretical results with experimental data is presented
in Fig. 4. While full numerical agreement has not been
achieved, our model qualitatively describes the asymmetric dependence of the Shapiro features on magnetic flux.
However, a notable inconsistency can be observed: the
experimental Shapiro steps appear to be less influenced
by thermal fluctuations, exhibiting a slower decrease in
amplitude with increasing voltage than our theory predicts. One potential explanation for this discrepancy
might be the overestimation of the effective temperature
used in our numerical simulations. Nonetheless, additional results obtained at lower temperatures, presented
in Appendix F, exhibit the same issue and do not align
quantitatively with the experimental data. Therefore,
this mismatch between theory and experiment might be
attributed to the non-equilibrium processes in the electronic subsystem that cannot be characterized by a single effective temperature parameter T and lie beyond the
theoretical framework of the RSJ model.

IV.

ANALYSIS OF THE SHAPIRO FEATURES

For a more detailed analysis of the Shapiro feature
asymmetry, we examine its variation with magnetic field
and rf power. We quantify the nth Shapiro feature depths
(for both positive and negative integers) using the relative change in differential resistance at the feature centers
R± from the value in the normal state: ∆R± = (R0 −R± )
(for more details about extracting these values from the
experimental data, see Appendix G). For definiteness, we
focus on the Shapiro feature with n = ±7 (corresponds
to |V |/V0 = 6.5 in the experiment). At the same time,
features with other numbers demonstrate similar behavior.
The obtained experimental result for the Shapiro features dependence on the magnetic field is shown in
Fig. 5(a). The curves for both current directions exhibit a periodic dependence on the field and can be
well fitted by a sinusoidal function, which is plotted in
the same figure with solid lines. The oscillation periods obtained during the fit for the positive and negative
branches are ∆B+ = ∆B− = 1.04 G, which exactly coincide with the SQUID period measured by the critical
current oscillations, see Fig. 2(b). Furthermore, we investigate the dependence of the Shapiro features asymmetry, ∆R+ −∆R− , over a wider range of magnetic field, as
demonstrated in Fig. 5(b). At larger magnetic field values, the envelope of the oscillations in the asymmetry of
the Shapiro features has the same form as the Fraunhofer
dependence of the SQUID critical currents Ic± on the
magnetic field, see Fig. 2(c). These observations demonstrate that the diode effect in the Shapiro features arises

8

FIG. 5. Quantitative analysis of the Shapiro features and comparison between the experimental data, shown in the top row,
and the theoretical results [obtained from Eq. (12)], shown in the bottom. (a) and (d) Dependence of the Shapiro features
depths ∆R± on the magnetic field at |V |/V0 = 6.5 (corresponding to n = ±7 in the theoretical model). The dots represent
experimental data for positive (red) and negative (blue) current directions, collected with an applied microwave signal at a
frequency frf = 3.754 GHz and a generator power Prf = 1 mW. The solid lines indicate fits with a sinusoidal function, which
show good agreement with the experimental points. The theoretical results are also close to a sinusoidal function. (b) and (e)
Fraunhofer envelope of the Shapiro features depths asymmetry ∆R+ − ∆R− over a wide range of the fields. The oscillations
of the diode effect strength with SQUID periodicity at small magnetic fields and Fraunhofer envelope at large magnetic fields
demonstrate that the asymmetry of the Shapiro features arises from the interplay of the two junctions. (c) and (f) Dependence
of ∆R± on microwave power at a fixed magnetic field B = 0.8 G, which corresponds to a flux Φ/Φ0 ≈ 0.77. The curves exhibit
a nonmonotonic dependence with periodic changes in the sign of the diode effect. We attribute this behavior to the heating
effect of microwave irradiation, which manifests itself through the temperature dependence of φc . The crossings of the curves
correspond to the condition sin φc (T ) = 0.

because of the asymmetric structure of the SQUID.
At the same time, the study of the asymmetry of the
Shapiro features reveals their non-monotonic dependence
on the power of the microwave signal. As demonstrated
in Fig. 5(c), at a fixed magnetic flux value through the
SQUID, Φ = 3Φ0 /4, with an increase in the power of the
rf signal, the depths of the Shapiro features alternately
reach their maxima in the positive and negative current
directions. However, this behavior is radically different
from the Bessel-law dependence typically observed for the
amplitudes of the Shapiro features in similar experiments
with JJs.
To explain these results, we develop a theoretical
framework using the “Slowly Varying Phase” perturbation method [75, 92, 93] concerning the smallness of the
supercurrent and thermal fluctuations compared to the
dc current. In addition, we focus on the vicinity of the
centers of the Shapiro features. In this case, we sepa-

rate the phase dynamics into “fast” [varying on a short
time scale τ ≲ (nω)−1 ] and “slow” [varying on a long
time scale τ ≫ (nω)−1 ] parts, and then conduct averaging over an intermediate timescale (nω)−1 ≪ ∆τ ≪
T −1 , (v̂ − nω)−1 . We use the “hat” symbol for functions
averaged over such timescales. This procedure allows us
to exclude fast dynamics and derive the effective (Josephson) equations (for more details see Appendix H) for slow
functions,
θ̇n (τ ) + Iˆs± (τ ) = ∆j + ξ(τ ),

(9)

where θ̇n and ∆j are deviations of the average (over time)
voltage and current from the centers of the nth Shapiro
features:
v̂(τ ) = nω + θ̇n (τ ),

jdc = nω + A0± + ∆j,

(10)

and Iˆs± (τ ) are the averaged supercurrents in the R state

9
(excluding the A0± term, which determines the location of the Shapiro feature) for positive and negative
CVC branches, respectively. The time dependence of
Iˆs± (τ ) enters through the effective current-phase relations Iˆs± (θn ). Equation (9) can be solved numerically.
The effective current-phase relations Iˆs± (θn ) differ
from the sawtooth CPR discussed previously in Sec. II B.
Their Fourier harmonics contain additional factors given
by Bessel functions, see Eq. (H3). As a result of this,
the amplitudes decrease faster than in the case of the
sawtooth CPR. A reasonable approximation is then the
“single-harmonic approximation”, where only the first
harmonic in the effective CPR is taken into account,

Iˆs± (τ ) = A1± Jn (jac /ω) sin θn (τ ) .
(11)
As we demonstrate below, this approximation provides a
qualitatively correct description of the diode effect in our
system because it captures the main mechanism, A1− ̸=
A1+ asymmetry.
The effective equation on the phase θn [Eq. (9)] with
supercurrent given by Eq. (11) takes the form of the standard Josephson equation for a sinusoidal junction (however, with different critical currents for opposite current
directions). Such equations have been studied in detail
in many theoretical works [94–97], allowing us to directly
apply the well-known expressions for the CVC to our case
(for more details, see Appendix I). As a result, we obtain
the differential resistance at the centers of the Shapiro
features:
(
R±
(2π/T± ) exp(−2/T± ), T± ≪ 1,
−2
= I0 (1/T± ) =
R0
(1 − 1/2T±2 ), T± ≫ 1,
(12)
where I0 is the modified Bessel function and T± =
T /A1± Jn (jac /ω) is the effective dimensionless temperature that determines the strength of thermal fluctuation
in different current directions near the centers of the nth
Shapiro features.
The dependence of the Shapiro features on the magnetic field obtained from the theoretical model is shown
in Figs. 5(d) and (e). The curves in Fig. 5(d), originating from the exact Bessel function I0 in Eq. (12), demonstrate an almost harmonic dependence on the magnetic
field. Analytically, the dependence of this type arises
in the high-temperature limit of Eq. (12), ∆R± /R0 =
A21± Jn2 (jac /ω)/2T 2 ∝ const+Isns (ϕ) cos (ϕ ± φc ), see Eq.
(3). At the same time, the Isns (ϕ) dependence manifests
itself at larger magnetic fields, leading to the Fraunhofer
envelope of the Shapiro features asymmetry, see Fig. 5(e).
Theoretical results for the dependence of the Shapiro
features’ depths on the power of ac irradiation are shown
in Fig. 5(f). In our consideration, we take into account
both effects of external irradiation, which are the generation of the ac current jac and heating of the sample
(for more details, see Appendix J). Our findings indicate
that it is the heating effect responsible for the observed
changes in the sign of the diode effect. This occurs because the critical phase φc depends on temperature, as

shown in Fig. 2(f). As the power of irradiation increases,
it raises the temperature, which in turn changes the sign
of sin φc with the corresponding change in the diode effect sign.

V.
A.

DISCUSSION

Manifestation of the multivalued CPR in the
Shapiro steps asymmetry

In the above consideration, we have primarily focused
on the asymmetry of the Shapiro features, which occur under applied external microwave irradiation. As
shown in Fig. 4, this asymmetry can be pronounced at
specific values of the magnetic fluxes, Φ ≈ Φ0 /4 and
Φ ≈ 3Φ0 /4. Theoretically, we explain this effect as arising from the asymmetry in the amplitudes of the first harmonics A1+ ̸= A1− at sin ϕ sin φc ̸= 0. Confirmation of
the dependence of this asymmetry on sin φc is evident in
the relationship between the strength of the diode effect
and the power of microwave irradiation [see Fig. 5(c)].
The point is that the temperature increase caused by irradiation effectively changes φc [see Fig. 2(f)], leading to
periodic changes in the sign of the diode effect. This is
a manifestation of the multivalued nature of the diode
effect in the R state. In contrast, in SQUIDs solely consisting of JJs with single-valued CPRs, this mechanism
of the diode effect does not exist.
However, even for single-valued junctions, it is possible to observe asymmetry in the Shapiro steps [77–80].
In this case, the diode effect is caused by phase shifts between different harmonics in the effective SQUID currentphase relation [51, 52]. It is important to note that this
mechanism of the Shapiro steps asymmetry differs from
the one described above. We also emphasise that in
previous works, asymmetries in only a few of the first
Shapiro steps were investigated, while we observe up to
ten asymmetric Shapiro features.

B.

Comparison of asymmetries in the critical
current and Shapiro features

Additionally, we would like to address the coexistence
of the weak diode effect in critical currents alongside the
noticeable asymmetry observed in the Shapiro features.
In the S state, as mentioned in Sec. III A, the asymmetry of the critical currents reaches a maximum value
∆Ic = 2πInb /φc . At the same time, the diode efficiency
η ≈ πInb /φc (Inb + Isns ) ≈ 3% is small because of the
small critical current asymmetry compared to the large
critical current values that are mostly determined by the
zeroth harmonic contributions A0± [see Eq. (2)]. This is
a consequence of the large φc = 58 value at T = 50 mK.
However, in the R state where Shapiro features are
measured, the temperature is high, T ∼ (1−3) K, in contrast to the S state. In this regime, the critical currents

10
are strongly suppressed, see Figs. 2(d) and 2(e). This explains the strong smearing, which leads to small depths of
the Shapiro features observed in the experiment. At the
same time, the Shapiro steps’ asymmetry is determined
by the A1± harmonics [see Eq. (3)], which depend on the
relation between Isns and the amplitude of the first har(nb)
monic of the sawtooth nanobridge CPR, I1 = 2Inb /φc .
In the R state, they are comparable to each other. For
(nb)
example, Isns ≈ 0.3 µA and I1
≈ 0.8 µA at T = 1.8 K.
This leads to the fact that the relative asymmetry between A1+ and A1− is pronounced, resulting in strong
asymmetry of the Shapiro features despite their small
sizes. To summarize, the asymmetry of the critical currents is suppressed by the large φc value, while the asymmetry of the Shapiro features is strong because of the
pronounced relative asymmetry between A1+ and A1− .
C.

Optimization of the critical phase value to
enhance the diode effect

As follows from the above discussion, to enhance the
difference in the SQUID critical current for positive and
negative directions and use it as a Josephson diode operating in the dc regime, it is essential to decrease the
critical phase value. At the same time, to reach a high
relative asymmetry between A1+ and A1− in order to
observe significant asymmetry in the Shapiro features in
the ac regime, it is necessary to adjust the critical phase
(nb)
value so that Isns and I1
become comparable. This
may involve both increasing and decreasing the critical
phase value. Note that this parameter is directly proportional to the length of the nanobridge, thus it can be
controlled by selecting an appropriate nanobridge size.
Alternatively, the critical phase value can be reduced by
increasing the effective temperature, achievable through
adjustments to the cryostat temperature or by applying
external irradiation.
D.

Increasing the visibility of the Shapiro steps

In our experiment, we observe smeared Shapiro steps,
manifested as dips in the differential resistance of up
to 30%. This behavior is attributed to thermal fluctuations arising from the self-heating effects. The impact
of these thermal fluctuations on the system dynamics can
be quantitatively described using the effective normalized
temperature T [see Eq. (7)]. Several strategies can be
proposed to reduce this parameter and thereby enhance
the visibility of the Shapiro features. One approach is
to increase the critical currents of both junctions, which
would suppress the relative influence of thermal fluctuations. For instance, Ref. [89] demonstrates clear Shapiro
steps (a complete drop in resistance to zero) for a single
nanobridge with critical current an order of magnitude
larger than in our system. Another strategy involves mitigating the self-heating effects, which are responsible for

the high effective temperature on the backward branch
of the SQUID’s CVC. One potential solution is to improve heat dissipation by using a substrate with higher
thermal conductivity at cryogenic temperatures than the
Si/SiO2 used in our setup — for example, non-oxidized
silicon or sapphire. Additionally, thermal hysteresis in
superconducting nanobridges can be reduced by depositing a normal metal layer to enhance heat transfer [98].
Finally, the introduction of a shunt resistance across the
device can also be employed as an effective strategy to
reduce the dissipation.

E.

Selecting a junction accompanying the
nanobridge in the SQUID

In this work, the Shapiro diode effect was investigated
in the SQUID containing a Josephson junction formed
through a Bi2 Te2 Se flake. This sample was selected based
on our previous research [81], which demonstrates that,
despite the specificity of the material, such a junction exhibits a standard sinusoidal CPR — a key requirement for
our model. At the same time, a sinusoidal CPR is also
typical for other types of Josephson junctions that use
metals or insulators as barriers [76]. Consequently, our
results are broadly applicable to such systems, with no
fundamental constraints on the sinusoidal junction type.
We emphasize that achieving high diode efficiency requires the sinusoidal junction critical current to be comparable to the first harmonic of the nanobridge sawtooth
CPR.

F.

Limitations of the theoretical model

Finally, we note that some factors and features corresponding to the complex behavior of the system are
not captured by our RSJ model, particularly the Shapiro
features shift. In addition, there may be other mechanisms of temperature relaxation besides the electronphonon mechanism assumed in our consideration. Taking them into account might increase the widths of the
curves in Fig. 5(f), which are currently smaller than the
experimentally observed ones. Furthermore, the nonequilibrium processes, which cannot be described by the
effective temperature T , might also occur in the system, potentially explaining the discrepancy between experiment and theory in Fig. 4, where the experimental
Shapiro steps exhibit a more gradual decrease with voltage than the theory predicts. At the same time, our
relatively simple model qualitatively reproduces all the
peculiarities observed in the experiment and relates them
to the properties of the junctions. Hence, we expect that
complicating the model will improve the results quantitatively but will not lead to qualitatively new features of
the diode effect in the system.

11
VI.

CONCLUSIONS

We have experimentally investigated the Josephson
diode effect in the asymmetric SQUID containing a sinusoidal SNS junction and a superconducting nanobridge
with a multivalued, almost linear current-phase relation.
The multivalued nature of the current-phase relation of
the nanobridge manifests itself in the nontrivial value of
the critical phase φc ≫ π which distinguishes it from
conventional single-valued junctions.
We conducted both dc and ac measurements of the
SQUID current-voltage characteristics. While the dc
measurements revealed only weak critical current asymmetry, they confirmed the multivalued nature of the
SQUID behavior and allowed us to extract the temperature dependence of the junction parameters. At the
same time, in the ac measurements, we observed strong
asymmetry of the Shapiro features (for different current
directions) with feature numbers up to 10 on the backward part of the Joule-heating-driven hysteretic CVC.
We investigated the dependence of the Shapiro features on the magnetic field for both current directions. In
this case, we observed periodic oscillations of the Shapiro
diode effect strength at low magnetic fields and a Fraunhofer envelope at higher magnetic fields. We also conducted measurements of the Shapiro features asymmetry
concerning the power of external microwave irradiation
Prf . These measurements demonstrated nonmonotonic
behavior of the Shapiro features, which differs significantly from the expected Bessel-law dependence. All
the above-mentioned dependencies show switching of the
diode effect sign.
To explain the observed peculiarities, we developed a
theoretical framework using the method of slowly varying phase and performed numerical simulations within
the RSJ model with thermal noise. The results have
demonstrated qualitatively good agreement between the
theoretical predictions and experimental data.
The key observation of our theoretical model is that
in our asymmetric SQUID at finite magnetic fields, the
amplitudes of the Josephson harmonics generally differ
for opposite current directions (A1+ ̸= A1− in our case),
leading to strong asymmetry of the Shapiro features.
This effect requires a nontrivial value of the critical phase
sin φc ̸= 0 and, hence, is not present in SQUIDs where
both junctions are single-valued.
The sign and strength of the diode effect in the Shapiro
features are controlled by the sin ϕ sin φc combination.
Therefore, the periodic dependence of Shapiro features
asymmetry on the magnetic field corresponds to the
SQUID oscillations, while their nonmonotonic behavior
concerning the power of microwave irradiation results
from the heating effect and the corresponding temperature dependence of the critical phase φc (T ).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank M. Yu. Kupriyanov for useful discussions.
This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and
Higher Education of the Russian Federation (Grant No.
075-15-2025-010, sample fabrication; Grant No. FSMG2023-0014, data analysis and approximations) and by the
Russian Science Foundation (Grant No. 25-42-00058,
low-temperature measurements). G.S.S. acknowledges
support from the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation (Project No. FFWR-20240017). Ya.V.F. was supported by the Basic Research
Program of HSE.

Appendix A: Estimation of φc

We estimate φc assuming that the critical current of
the niobium nanobridge Inb corresponds to the depairing current. The critical phase can be expressed as
φc = φnp + φb , where φnp is the phase drop along the
narrow part of the nanobridge and φb is the phase drop
along its banks. Our nanobridge is long (in units of
coherence length in niobium, ξNb ∼ 10 nm) and diffusive. In this case, the Usadel model is applicable and
predicts that the phase gradient in the nanobridge is
equal to 0.68/ξNb (see Fig. 2 in Ref. [99]) resulting in
φnp = 0.68lnp /ξNb ≈ 26, where lnp = 0.38 µm is the
length of the narrow part. For φb calculation, we use
the fact that the phase drop along a segment at a fixed
current behaves as φseg ∝ lseg /wseg , where lseg and wseg
are the segment length and width, respectively. This relates the phase drop along the banks to the phase drop
along the narrow part as φb = φnp (lb wnp /lnp wb ), where
lb = 3.12 µm is the overall banks length, wb = 0.7 µm
and wnp = 0.22 µm are the widths of the banks and
the narrow part of the nanobridge, respectively. As
a result, we obtain an estimate of the critical phase
φc = φnp (1 + lb wnp /lnp wb ) ≈ 93.
Generally, Inb can be smaller than the depairing current, which would lead to a smaller value of the critical
phase compared to the above estimate. This could explain the difference between the value obtained above and
that determined from the direct fitting of the experimental data, see Fig. 2(f).

Appendix B: Geometric inductances

To ensure that the applied magnetic flux Φ almost
precisely coincides with the magnetic flux through the
SQUID loop, we estimate the geometric inductances of
the SQUID arms.
Generally, the total magnetic flux through the loop is
the sum of the external flux Φ and the flux generated by
the circulating current Icirc , which is given by Lloop Icirc ,
where Lloop is the geometric inductance. Using electromagnetic modeling with the sample geometry, we cal-

12
culated Lloop = 10 pH. The inductance of each SQUID
arm can be estimated as Larm = Lloop /2 = 5 pH, which
turns out to be much smaller than the inductances of
the SNS junction Lsns = Φ0 /2πIsns = 14 pH and the
nanobridge Lnb = φc Φ0 /2πInb = 340 pH calculated at
the lowest temperature T = 50 mK. In addition, when
we discuss Shapiro steps, we take into account that they
appear on the overheated backward branch of the CVC,
which leads to a significant decrease in critical currents.
This means that the inductances of the JJs become several times larger. Therefore, in our model, we neglect the
effect of the geometric inductance and assume that the
flux in the SQUID equals the external flux Φ.

Appendix C: Asymmetry of the critical currents

The critical currents of the SQUID in different current directions are given by the extrema of supercurrent
defined by Eq. (1):

Ic± = max(min)φ

Inb φ
Isns (ϕ) sin(φ + ϕ) +
φc

2Inb
[π (Nv+ − Nv− ) − ϕ] .
(C3)
φc
Finally, it is possible that one critical current is reached
at ±φc , while the second one is reached at φ∗± . The
results are illustrated in Figs. 6(b) and (c).
∆Ic =

Appendix D: Temperature dependence of junction
parameters

We approximate the experimentally measured critical currents Inb , Isns , and critical phase φc dependencies on the temperature T in the following way. For
the nanobridge, we assume the Likharev-Yakobson model
[57–59] formulated for long and narrow superconducting
bridges. In the framework of this model, the critical current and critical phase have the following temperature
dependencies,
(f )

Inb (T ) = Inb (1 − T /Ttr )3/2 ,
p
)
φc (T ) = φ(f
1 − T /Ttr ,
c


, (C1)

(f )

where φ lies within the range [−φc , φc ]. As discussed
in Sec.III A, these extrema may occur either at the
∗
boundaries
±φc or

 at the positions φ± = ±2πNv± ±

nb
arccos − φc IIsns
(ϕ) − ϕ numerated by integer vorticity
numbers Nv± .
When critical currents are reached at the ±φc , they
take the values determined by Eq. (5). This behavior
corresponds to the steep (almost vertical) segments in the
Ic± (B) dependence in Fig. 6(a) [which is the reproduced
theoretical curves for the highest branches of the critical
currents from Fig. 2(b)]. However, this is nothing more
than part of the sinusoidal CPR of the SNS junction.
At the same time, when critical currents are reached at
φ∗± , they are given by Eq. (6). This behavior corresponds
to the not-so-steep linear segments in Fig. 6(a), and this
is nothing more than a part of the linear CPR of the
nanobridge.
Note that φ∗± exists only when the critical current
of the SNS junction is large enough so that κ =
Isns (ϕ)φc /Inb > 1. At the same time, at large magnetic
fields, this condition is violated because of Fraunhofer
suppression of the SNS critical current. Therefore, in
this regime, critical currents are reached at ±φc . However, we do not conduct our measurements in such strong
magnetic fields and do not observe such a phenomenon.
Additionally, we examine the asymmetry of the critical
current, defined as ∆Ic (ϕ) = Ic+ (ϕ) − Ic− (ϕ). In the
regime where both critical currents are reached at ±φc ,
we find

∆Ic = 2Isns (ϕ) cos φc sin ϕ.

reached at φ∗± , we obtain

(C2)

In the other regime, when both critical currents are

(D1)
(D2)

(f )

where we take Inb = 88 µA, φc = 62, and Ttr = 2.4 K
as fitting parameters. Here, Ttr is the transition (critical) temperature of the nanobridge, which is significantly
smaller than the critical temperature of the thick niobium, as mentioned in Sec. III A. The results of our approximation are presented in Figs. 2(e) and (f), respectively.
At the same time, we consider the junction formed by
the flake of Bi2 Te2 Se as a long dirty SNS junction, with
the critical current given by the expression from Refs.
[100, 101],
∞

Isns (T ) =

64πT X L
h
eRsns n=0 Lωn

∆2 exp (−L/Lωn )
i2 ,
p
ωn + Ωn + 2(Ω2n + ωn Ωn )

(D3)
p
2 + ∆2 , and L
where
ω
=
(2n
+
1)πT
,
Ω
=
ω
n
n
ω
n
n =
p
ℏD/2ωn .
Here, Rsns is the effective resistance of the SNS junction, L is the distance between the superconducting electrodes, D is the diffusion constant of the N metal, and
∆ is the proximity-induced superconducting gap of the
regions beneath the flake. Experimentally, the critical
temperature of the SNS junction is found to be approximately equal to the transition temperature of the
nanobridge. Therefore, for simplicity, we assume that
the SNS junction has the same critical temperature Ttr
(which enters ∆) as the nanobridge. We take Rsns and
the relation between
p the junction length L and the thermal length LT = ℏD/2πT at T = 2 K as fitting parameters. To obtain the results presented in Fig. 2(d),
we choose the following values: Rsns = 15.5 Ω, and
L/LT = 5.73 at T = 2 K. In the relevant temperature
range, T ∼ (1 − 3) K, the assumption that the SNS junction is long is satisfied since L/LT ∼ 5.

13

FIG. 6. Asymmetry of the critical currents in the dc regime (theory). (a) Reproduced theoretical curves from Fig. 2(b) for the
highest branches of the critical current dependencies on the magnetic field B through the loop for positive (red) and negative
(blue) current directions. In this scale, parts of sinusoidal CPR [see Eq. (5)] look almost vertical. At the same time, the not-sosteep linear segments are the parts of the nanobridge CPR [see Eq. (6)]. (b) Dependence of the critical current asymmetry ∆Ic
on the magnetic field. (c) Dependence of the phases φmax corresponding to the critical current, on the magnetic field for positive
(red) and negative (blue) current directions. The steep (almost vertical) segments in panel (a) correspond to φmax = ±φc [flat
parts of φmax (B)], while the not-so-steep linear segments correspond to the linear parts of φmax (B). The transition between
the two regimes of φmax (B) is abrupt. The parameters used for plotting the curves are taken from Table I for sample N7.

Appendix E: Shapiro steps shift

The reasons for the Shapiro steps to be located at halfinteger values in the case of the discussed sample (N7)
remain unclear. During this research, three samples were
thoroughly measured, and the additional data can be
found in the Appendix K. First of all, the phenomena
discussed in this paper are not unique to a single sample,
since the same shift and diode effect in Shapiro steps were
observed in another SQUID (N8) with similar parameters
(see Table I), as can be seen in Figs. 8(a) and (b). At the
same time, both effects are absent in data from sample
N5, see Figs. 8(c) and (d). We attribute this to the fact
that the critical current through the SNS junction in this
sample is an order of magnitude smaller than in two other
samples and than the critical current of the nanobridge
(see Table I). This means that in the R state, because of
overheating, the SNS critical current becomes negligible,
and the SQUID works as a nanobridge shunted by normal resistance. Summarizing all the above, we observe
shifted steps in samples N7 and N8, and unshifted ones
in sample N5. This eliminates the possibility of errors
because of the measuring system or b data processing.
We measured half-integer Shapiro steps at different
frequencies in the range from frf = 2.8 GHz to frf =
3.8 GHz; the results are demonstrated in Fig. 8(e). At
the same time, Fig. 8(f) shows that at high rf power,
when the supercurrent is fully suppressed, we are able to
observe Shapiro steps from |V |/V0 = 12 to |V |/V0 = 17 12 .
Thus, the shifted position of the Shapiro steps cannot
be related to a series-connected resistance since it would
change the voltage period of the steps, which would be
noticeable in such a wide range of voltages.
At the same time, we note that the shift of the Shapiro
features cannot be described theoretically by our RSJ
model presented by Eqs. (7) and (8), which predicts po-

sitions of the steps to be exactly at v = (n/k)ω (where
n and k are integers) with the most pronounced steps
corresponding to k = 1. Therefore, we must consider additional factors beyond the presented RSJ model, which
may be related to the complex dynamics within the junctions themselves or in the SQUID.
One of these factors is geometrical inductance Lloop of
the SQUID, which we neglect in our model. For example, Ref. [102] shows that even if both JJs in SQUID have
a sinusoidal CPR, with a large enough Lloop , fractional
steps may occur because of their sequential phase changing. Such behavior was demonstrated experimentally in
Ref. [79], where the half step became even larger than
the first one at specific values of magnetic flux. However,
this effect disappears when the SQUID contains an integer number of flux quanta. In contrast, in our case, the
Shapiro steps are at half-integer positions at arbitrary
flux, so this mechanism is not relevant in our case. In
addition, our estimations presented in Appendix B show
that the influence of inductance is negligible in our case.
Another possible factor is connected with the properties of the R state in the nanobridge. Our nanobridge is
long (in units of superconducting coherence length), and
it may contain several intrinsic “weak” places along its
length. At I > Inb the resistive state starts from vortex penetration via the weakest place and vortex passage
through the bridge. As the current increases, the vortices
may start entering other weak places and interact with
vortices nucleated in other places. The overall behavior
can be rather complicated; see, for example, Ref. [103],
where the response of several weak places connected in
series to rf irradiation has been studied.
The relevance of these factors to the explanation of
the Shapiro steps shift is not clear at present. Moreover,
there may be other factors that could cause this effect and
which are not mentioned above. For example, a similar

14
shift of the Shapiro steps was observed in Ref. [104] in a
completely different system for unknown reasons.

Appendix F: Comparison of the theoretical results
for the Shapiro features at different temperatures

As discussed in Sec. III B, the theoretical results in
Fig. 4 show only qualitative agreement with the experimental data. While the experimental data exhibit three
distinct features in the shown voltage range, our theoretical model reproduces only two of them. The third feature
(corresponding to n = ±9) is predicted to be comparable in magnitude to the thermal noise level, rendering it
effectively unobservable. In addition, the depths of the
Shapiro features decrease much faster with the voltage in
theory compared to the experiment.
The most straightforward explanation for this discrepancy would be an overestimation of the effective temperature and its associated thermal fluctuations. However,
both of our estimates of effective temperature, based on
Ir measurements and experiments conducted under external irradiation, lead to the result that T ∼ 2 K, which
aligns with the temperature value used in our calculations presented in Fig. 4.
At the same time, by allowing the temperature to take
arbitrary values within the model, we can generate plots
similar to those in Fig. 4, albeit with varying sizes of
the Shapiro features. For example, the comparison of
the results for the Shapiro features at T = 1.8 K and
T = 1 K are shown in Fig. 7. It is evident that both
the depth and width of the Shapiro features increase as
the temperature decreases. Furthermore, because of the
reduction of thermal noise effects, it becomes feasible to
observe the n = ±9 Shapiro features in Fig. 7(b). However, despite the qualitative similarity of the theoretical
curves to those observed experimentally, significant discrepancies remain. As illustrated in Fig. 7, the depths of
the theoretically calculated Shapiro features are considerably larger in amplitude compared to the experimental
results. Additionally, there remains an issue regarding
the rapid decrease in the depth of the Shapiro features
with increasing voltage.
Considering all the mentioned-above factors, we have
decided to use the results shown in the theoretical curve
in Fig. 4, which are calculated at T = 1.8 K, for comparison with the experimental data in the main text.

Appendix G: Experimental methods

The measurements were carried out in a dilution refrigerator at a temperature T = 50 mK. IV curves of the
SQUID were measured using the four-terminal technique.
For the measurements of the critical current oscillations,
we applied an ac current with the frequency 17 Hz using
a Low-distortion Function Generator SRS DS360. The
voltage response was first amplified and filtered with a

preamplifier SRS SR560, and then digitized by the NI9234 ADC. The critical current was identified when the
voltage exceeded the threshold value Vthr = 20 µV. During the measurements of the differential resistance, we
used a different setup with a dc current source Keithley
6221 and a nanovoltmeter Keithley 2182A. The rf signal
was generated using VNA Cobalt C1220 and delivered to
the sample through a coaxial cable with a −20 dB cryogenic attenuator. The open end of the cable was fixed
to the holder a few millimeters above the surface of the
sample, acting as an rf antenna.
To reduce the influence of noise effects on the experimentally obtained dependencies presented in Fig. 5, we
average the Shapiro step depths in the following way.
As ∆R± we take the average value of the resistance in
the voltage range [Vn /V0 − 1/2, Vn /V0 + 1/2], where Vn
is the voltage corresponding to the nth Shapiro feature
center. This procedure leads to smoothing of the curves
presented in Fig. 5, while decreasing the depth of the
steps. It results in a difference in the step depths, presented in the experimental panels in Figs. 4 and 5.
Appendix H: Method of slowly varying phase and
effective Josephson equations

As mentioned in Sec. IV, to find the shapes of the nth
Shapiro features (with both positive and negative numbers) in the vicinity of their centers, we apply the first
iteration of the perturbation method of slowly varying
phase. Specifically, we represent the phase as a sum of
“fast” [varies at short time scale τ ≲ (nω)−1 ] and “slow”
[varies at long time scale τ ≫ (nω)−1 ] parts, respectively,
φ(τ ) = φf (τ ) + φs (τ ). We assume that supercurrent and
thermal fluctuations are small compared to dc current
[accurate conditions of applicability are discussed below
Eq. (H3)]. Particularly, the CVC is close to Ohm’s law
v̂ = nω. At the same time, the fast dynamics of the phase
is determined by dc and ac currents, while the supercurrent and thermal fluctuations are responsible only for the
slow corrections to the phase dynamics. Therefore, in the
zeroth order of the perturbation theory
φf (τ ) = nωτ + (jac /ω) sin ωτ ,

φs (τ ) = θn (τ ). (H1)

It is important to remember that even though θn (τ ) is
a slow function, it contains a linearly growing with time
part, which corresponds to the slow part of v̂(τ ), see Eq.
(10).
In the first order, we take the supercurrent and thermal
fluctuations into account. For this, we consider ξ(τ ) in
the right-hand side of Eq. (7) and also substitute φf (τ )
to Is (φ) and expand the resulting expression into the
Fourier series:


∞
∞
X
X
kjac
m
Is± (τ ) =
(−1) Ak± Jm
ω
k=1 m=−∞

× sin k(θn + δk± ) + (kn − m)ωτ . (H2)

15

FIG. 7. Theoretical results within the RSJ model at Φ/Φ0 = 1/4, Iac = 12 µA, and different temperatures taking into account
the temperature dependencies of junction parameters: (a) T = 1.8 K, φc = 30, Isns = 0.3 µA, and Inb = 12 µA, (b) T = 1 K,
φc = 47, Isns = 2.8 µA, Inb = 37 µA. As temperature decreases, both the depths and widths of the Shapiro features increase,
which is the result of a decrease in the strength of thermal fluctuations.

After that, we average the Josephson equation in the first
order with supercurrent given by Eq. (H2) over time ∆τ
such that (nω)−1 ≪ ∆τ ≪ T −1 , (v̂ − nω)−1 to exclude
fast oscillating terms and obtain the effective equation for
the slow functions. Averaging over ∆τ implies: (i) keeping θn intact in the left-hand side of Eq. (7), (ii) keeping
only the slow part of ξ(τ ) (which in this order of perturbation theory can still be considered as a white noise),
and (iii) keeping in the supercurrent Eq. (H2) only terms
with m = kn while neglecting all other terms since they
oscillate with frequencies ≳ ω. As a result of this procedure, we obtain the effective Josephson equation in the
form of Eq. (9) with the averaged supercurrents given by
Iˆs± (τ ) =

∞
X

nk

(−1) Ak± Jnk

k=1



kjac
ω





sin k[θn (τ ) + δk± ] .

(H3)
One of the validity regimes of Eq. (9), which is relevant
for our case, is ∆j ≪ 1 (small deviation from the center
of noise-free Shapiro steps), Ak ≪ 1 (small supercurrent
compared to dc), T /nω ≪ 1 (small thermal fluctuations
compared to dc currents contributions).
At the same time, if we neglect harmonics with k > 1
and make the phase shift θn 7→ θn −δ1± −πn (which does
not change the CVC), we obtain the supercurrent in the
single-harmonic approximation given by Eq. (11). The
single-harmonic approximation is rigorously justified in
the limiting case jac /ω ≪ 1, when higher harmonics in
Eq. (H3) are parametrically smaller than the first one.

Appendix I: Calculation of R± in the
single-harmonic approximation

θn with sinusoidal CPR:
θ̇n + j1± sin θn = ∆j + ξ(τ ),
j1± = |A1± Jn (jac /ω)| .

(I1)

For further analysis, it is convenient to work with the stationary Fokker-Planck equation on the distribution functions Pst± (θn ) which corresponds to the Langevin equation (I1):
∂Pst±
1
+
(sin θn − ∆j/j1± ) Pst± = Q± ,
∂θn
T±

(I2)

where Q± is the quantity that should be found from the
formalization condition on Pst± (θn ).
To obtain the CVC, one needs to solve the FokkerPlanck equation in the form of Eq. (I2) and calculate
the statistically-averaged voltage. For definiteness, we
consider ∆j > 0 and take into account the symmetry of
the Shapiro features at the end of the calculation. In
this way, we obtain the voltage contribution from the
slow dynamics, which is added to nω. As a result
Z
|⟨v⟩ − nω| = φ̇Pst± (φ)dφ
Z
= (∆j − j1± sin φ)Pst± (φ)dφ = −2πj1± T± Q± .

(I3)

We now only need to calculate Q± . It can be done with
the use of the variation of parameters method taking into
account the normalization condition and periodicity of
Pst± (φ),
1
=−
Q±

Z2π


dφ exp

φ∆j/j1± + cos φ
T±



0

As mentioned in Sec. IV, in the single-harmonic approximation [Eq. (11)], effective Josephson Eq. (9) has
the form of the ordinary Josephson equation for the phase

Z∞
×
φ



x∆j/j1± + cos x
dx exp −
.
T±

(I4)

16
To calculate the integrals in Eq. (I4), we perform the
following Fourier expansion:


 
 
∞
X
cos φ
1
1
exp
= I0
+2
cos kφ. (I5)
Ik
T±
T±
T±
k=1

Using Eq. (I5), we can represent Q± in the following
form:
#
 
Z2π "  
∞
X
1
1
1
+2
cos kφ
Ik
= − dφ I0
Q±
T±
T±
0

k=1

  
 
∞
X
1
∆j
2(−1)m
1
× I0
+
Im
T± j1± T± m=1
T± m2 + (∆j/j1± T± )2


∆j
×
cos mφ − m sin mφ .
(I6)
j1± T±

For the fitting procedure, we rewrite Eq. (J1) in the form
T = Afit (Prf + Y Pdc )1/5 ,

(J3)

where Afit = (Ce-ph Y )−1/5 . Here, we neglect CT05 term
because of its small value.
The R± (Prf ) dependence can be numerically obtained
from Eqs. (J2) and (J3). In Eq. (J2) we use the value
of ac current Iac at some value of rf power Prf as the
fitting parameter (instead of Y ). For this purpose, we
choose Prf = 1 mW because it corresponds to the location
of the most pronounced maximum in Fig. 5(c). At the
same time, in Eq.(J3) we use Afit as the second fitting
parameter.

The fitting procedure generates plots similar to
Fig. 5(f) with a different number of extrema, their amplitudes, and locations. In our fitting procedure we rePerforming the integration over φ and substituting Eq.
quire the location of the highest maximum to be at
(I6) to Eq. (I3), we obtain the voltage:
Prf = 1 mW, as it is in Fig. 5(c). We also adjust the
X
 
∞
2 −1
k
number of extrema and their amplitudes in theory with
1
(−1) (2 − δk,0 ) (∆j/j1± )
,
⟨v⟩ = nω+∆j
Ik2
2
those in Fig. 5(c). As a result, the fitting parameters are
T±
(∆j/j1± )2 + T± k 2
k=0
Afit = 1.72 K/mW1/5 , and Iac (1 mW) = 15.7 µA. At the
(I7)
same time, our model predicts that temperature changes
which is valid for both signs of ⟨v⟩ and ∆j. Taking the
from 2.2 K at Prf = 0 mW to 2.4 K at Prf = 2 mW. The
derivative of Eq. (I7), we obtain the expression for the
result is presented in Fig. 5(f).
differential resistance Eq. (12) from the main text.
Appendix J: Dependence of the Shapiro steps on
power of microwave irradiation

As mentioned in Sec. IV, the dependence of the Shapiro
feature depths on the power of ac irradiation demonstrates nonmonotonic behavior caused by the Joule heating effect. Our goal is to explain such behavior and obtain
theoretically the dependence of differential resistance on
rf irradiation power, which would reproduce the experimental result of Fig. 5(c) measured at Φ/Φ0 = 0.75 for
n = ±7. To do that, we need to relate the power of rf irradiation Prf and the temperature of the electron system
T and then substitute the T (Prf ) dependence to Eq. (12).
Moreover, we need to relate the power of rf irradiation
and the ac current, Iac (Prf ), which also enters Eq. (12).
We use the energy balance equation assuming that the
electron system is cooled by the phonon subsystem [90],

Prf /Y + Pdc = Ce-ph T 5 − T05 ,
(J1)
where Y is the factor determining what part of external
microwave irradiation power is transferred to the sample,
Ce-ph is the coefficient of the electron-phonon coupling,
T0 = 50 mK is the temperature of the phonon subsystem,
2
and Pdc = Idc
R0 is the Joule heating power owing dc
current |Idc | = 20 µA, which corresponds to the Shapiro
steps centers. We assume that the ac current is produced
by microwave irradiation and thus
2
Prf /Y = Iac
R0 /2.

(J2)

Appendix K: Additional Shapiro steps data

TABLE I. Parameters of the three measured SQUID samples
at T = 50 mK: the critical current of the SNS junction Isns ,
the nanobridge critical current Inb , the critical phase φc , and
the normal resistance R0 of the whole SQUID.
Sample Isns (µA) Inb (µA) φc R0 (Ω)
N5
1.6
48.9 63.8 7.5
N7
23.0
53.7 58.5 3.6
N8
11.1
62.9 61.5 2.8

During the experiments, we measured three samples
(N5, N7, and N8) with the same SQUID and nanobridge
designs but different BTS flakes serving as the SNS junction. Sample N7 is discussed in the main text. All
SQUIDs were studied under a magnetic field at 50 mK.
Using Eq. (1) to fit experimentally measured curves
Ic (H), we determined the main parameters of the samples, listed in Table I.
For all samples, the CVCs were measured at various
microwave frequencies and powers under different magnetic fields. Figure 8 shows some examples of the obtained results discussed in Appendix E.

17

FIG. 8. Additional data of the Shapiro steps measurements for different samples. Panel (a) shows the dependence of the
differential resistance on the backward branches near Ir± vs current through the sample and rf power in the external magnetic
field B = 0.29 G for sample N8. Panel (b) shows the Shapiro features in the positive and negative dc current directions under
the same conditions. The dips of the R(V ) dependence are located at |V |/V0 = n − 1/2 with integer n. The plots clearly show
the asymmetry of the Shapiro features for different current directions. Vertical left segments of the curves correspond to the
abrupt retrapping to the S state. Panels (c) and (d) present similar to (a) and (b) dependencies for sample N5 at the same
magnetic field. However, in this sample, the Shapiro features are located at integer values of |V |/V0 and do not demonstrate
noticeable asymmetry. (e) Curves for sample N7 at different frequencies of the external microwave signal. An additional shift
in 0.5 Ω was added sequentially to the data at different frequencies. The Shapiro features are located at half-integer positions
for all frequencies. Pcr is defined as the minimal rf power at which the retrapping current of the sample Ir is fully suppressed.
(f) Shapiro features in sample N7 measured at high microwave power, when the retrapping current is fully suppressed. At this
condition, we are able to observe 18 dips in the differential resistance, all located at half-integer values of |V |/V0 . With the
increase of |V |/V0 , the diode effect changes its sign. We attribute this to the Joule heating effect caused by dc current and
temperature dependence of the critical phase φc . At the same time, an unexpected increase of the Shapiro features depths is
observed in the range of |V |/V0 between 8 and 13.

[1] A. Malvino, D. Bates, and P. Hoppe, Electronic Principles (McGraw Hill, New York, 2020).
[2] K. Jiang and J. Hu, Superconducting diode effects, Nat.
Phys. 18, 1145 (2022).
[3] M. Nadeem, M. S. Fuhrer, and X. Wang, The superconducting diode effect, Nat. Rev. Phys. 5, 558 (2023).
[4] P. J. W. Moll and V. B. Geshkenbein, Evolution of superconducting diodes, Nat. Phys. 19, 1379 (2023).
[5] L. S. Levitov, Yu. V. Nazarov, and G. M. Eliashberg,
Magnetostatics of superconductors without an inversion center, Pis’ma Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 41, 365 (1985),
[JETP Lett. 41, 445 (1985)].
[6] V. M. Edelstein, The Ginzburg–Landau equation for superconductors of polar symmetry, J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter 8, 339 (1996).

[7] R. Wakatsuki, Y. Saito, S. Hoshino, Y. M. Itahashi,
T. Ideue, M. Ezawa, Y. Iwasa, and N. Nagaosa, Nonreciprocal charge transport in noncentrosymmetric superconductors, Sci. Adv. 3, e1602390 (2017).
[8] K. Yasuda, H. Yasuda, T. Liang, R. Yoshimi,
A. Tsukazaki, K. S. Takahashi, N. Nagaosa,
M. Kawasaki, and Y. Tokura, Nonreciprocal charge
transport at topological insulator/superconductor
interface, Nat. Commun. 10, 2734 (2019).
[9] F. Ando, Y. Miyasaka, T. Li, J. Ishizuka, T. Arakawa,
Y. Shiota, T. Moriyama, Y. Yanase, and T. Ono, Observation of superconducting diode effect, Nature 584,
373 (2020).
[10] A. Daido, Y. Ikeda, and Y. Yanase, Intrinsic superconducting diode effect, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 037001

18
(2022).
[11] N. F. Q. Yuan and L. Fu, Supercurrent diode effect and
finite-momentum superconductors, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 119, e2119548119 (2022).
[12] S. Ilić and F. S. Bergeret, Theory of the supercurrent
diode effect in Rashba superconductors with arbitrary
disorder, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 177001 (2022).
[13] J. J. He, Y. Tanaka, and N. Nagaosa, A phenomenological theory of superconductor diodes, New J. Phys. 24,
053014 (2022).
[14] T. H. Kokkeler, A. A. Golubov, and F. S. Bergeret, Field-free anomalous junction and superconducting diode effect in spin-split superconductor/topological
insulator junctions, Phys. Rev. B 106, 214504 (2022).
[15] T. Karabassov, I. V. Bobkova, A. A. Golubov, and
A. S. Vasenko, Hybrid helical state and superconducting
diode effect in superconductor/ferromagnet/topological
insulator heterostructures, Phys. Rev. B 106, 224509
(2022).
[16] M. Yu. Levichev, I. Yu. Pashenkin, N. S. Gusev, and
D. Yu. Vodolazov, Finite momentum superconductivity
in superconducting hybrids: Orbital mechanism, Phys.
Rev. B 108, 094517 (2023).
[17] T. Kokkeler, I. Tokatly, and F. S. Bergeret, Nonreciprocal superconducting transport and the spin Hall effect
in gyrotropic structures, SciPost Phys. 16, 055 (2024).
[18] S. V. Mironov, A. S. Mel’nikov, and A. I. Buzdin, Photogalvanic phenomena in superconductors supporting intrinsic diode effect, Phys. Rev. B 109, L220503 (2024).
[19] J. Hasan, D. Shaffer, M. Khodas, and A. Levchenko, Supercurrent diode effect in helical superconductors, Phys.
Rev. B 110, 024508 (2024).
[20] D. Kochan, A. Costa, I. Zhumagulov, and I. Žutić, Phenomenological theory of the supercurrent diode effect:
The lifshitz invariant (2023), arXiv:2303.11975 [condmat.supr-con].
[21] A. A. Mazanik, T. Kokkeler, I. V. Tokatly, and F. S.
Bergeret, Interfacial spin-orbit coupling in superconducting hybrid systems (2025), arXiv:2502.10911 [condmat.supr-con].
[22] D. Yu. Vodolazov and F. M. Peeters, Superconducting
rectifier based on the asymmetric surface barrier effect,
Phys. Rev. B 72, 172508 (2005).
[23] D. Cerbu, V. N. Gladilin, J. Cuppens, J. Fritzsche,
J. Tempere, J. T. Devreese, V. V. Moshchalkov, A. V.
Silhanek, and J. Van de Vondel, Vortex ratchet induced
by controlled edge roughness, New J. Phys. 15, 063022
(2013).
[24] S. S. Ustavschikov, M. Yu. Levichev, I. Yu. Pashenkin,
N. S. Gusev, S. A. Gusev, and D. Yu. Vodolazov, Diode
effect in a superconducting hybrid Cu/MoN strip with
a lateral cut, JETP 135, 226 (2022).
[25] D. Suri, A. Kamra, T. N. G. Meier, M. Kronseder,
W. Belzig, C. H. Back, and C. Strunk, Non-reciprocity
of vortex-limited critical current in conventional superconducting micro-bridges, Appl. Phys. Lett. 121,
102601 (2022).
[26] Y. Hou, F. Nichele, H. Chi, A. Lodesani, Y. Wu, M. F.
Ritter, D. Z. Haxell, M. Davydova, S. Ilić, O. GlezakouElbert, A. Varambally, F. S. Bergeret, A. Kamra, L. Fu,
P. A. Lee, and J. S. Moodera, Ubiquitous superconducting diode effect in superconductor thin films, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 131, 027001 (2023).
[27] M. Castellani, O. Medeiros, A. Buzzi, R. A. Foster,

M. Colangelo, and K. K. Berggren, A superconducting
full-wave bridge rectifier, Nat. Electron. 8, 417 (2025).
[28] J. E. Villegas, S. Savel’ev, F. Nori, E. M. Gonzalez,
J. V. Anguita, R. Garcia, and J. L. Vicent, A superconducting reversible rectifier that controls the motion of
magnetic flux quanta, Science 302, 1188 (2003).
[29] J. Van de Vondel, C. C. de Souza Silva, B. Y. Zhu,
M. Morelle, and V. V. Moshchalkov, Vortex-rectification
effects in films with periodic asymmetric pinning, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 94, 057003 (2005).
[30] B. L. T. Plourde, Nanostructured superconductors with
asymmetric pinning potentials: Vortex ratchets, IEEE
Trans. Appl. Supercond. 19, 3698 (2008).
[31] O. V. Dobrovolskiy, E. Begun, V. M. Bevz, R. Sachser,
and M. Huth, Upper frequency limits for vortex guiding
and ratchet effects, Phys. Rev. Appl. 13, 024012 (2020).
[32] Y.-Y. Lyu, J. Jiang, Y.-L. Wang, Z.-L. Xiao, S. Dong,
Q.-H. Chen, M. V. Milošević, H. Wang, R. Divan,
J. E. Pearson, P. Wu, F. M. Peeters, and W.-K. Kwok,
Superconducting diode effect via conformal-mapped
nanoholes, Nat. Commun. 12, 2703 (2021).
[33] T. Yokoyama, M. Eto, and Yu. V. Nazarov, Anomalous
Josephson effect induced by spin-orbit interaction and
Zeeman effect in semiconductor nanowires, Phys. Rev.
B 89, 195407 (2014).
[34] C.-Z. Chen, J. J. He, M. N. Ali, G.-H. Lee, K. C. Fong,
and K. T. Law, Asymmetric Josephson effect in inversion symmetry breaking topological materials, Phys.
Rev. B 98, 075430 (2018).
[35] A. A. Kopasov, A. G. Kutlin, and A. S. Mel’nikov, Geometry controlled superconducting diode and anomalous Josephson effect triggered by the topological phase
transition in curved proximitized nanowires, Phys. Rev.
B 103, 144520 (2021).
[36] Y. Zhang, Y. Gu, P. Li, J. Hu, and K. Jiang, General
theory of Josephson diodes, Phys. Rev. X 12, 041013
(2022).
[37] M. Davydova, S. Prembabu, and L. Fu, Universal
Josephson diode effect, Sci. Adv. 8, eabo0309 (2022).
[38] K. Halterman, M. Alidoust, R. Smith, and S. Starr, Supercurrent diode effect, spin torques, and robust zeroenergy peak in planar half-metallic trilayers, Phys. Rev.
B 105, 104508 (2022).
[39] C. Baumgartner, L. Fuchs, A. Costa, S. Reinhardt,
S. Gronin, G. C. Gardner, T. Lindemann, M. J. Manfra,
P. E. Faria Junior, D. Kochan, J. Fabian, N. Paradiso,
and C. Strunk, Supercurrent rectification and magnetochiral effects in symmetric Josephson junctions, Nat.
Nanotechnol. 17, 39 (2022).
[40] A. Costa, J. Fabian, and D. Kochan, Microscopic study
of the Josephson supercurrent diode effect in josephson
junctions based on two-dimensional electron gas, Phys.
Rev. B 108, 054522 (2023).
[41] J. S. Meyer and M. Houzet, Josephson diode effect in a
ballistic single-channel nanowire, Appl. Phys. Lett. 125,
022603 (2024).
[42] D. Debnath and P. Dutta, Gate-tunable Josephson
diode effect in Rashba spin-orbit coupled quantum dot
junctions, Phys. Rev. B 109, 174511 (2024).
[43] P. Chatterjee and P. Dutta, Quasiparticles-mediated
thermal diode effect in Weyl Josephson junctions, New
J. Phys. 26, 073035 (2024).
[44] J. J. Cuozzo, W. Pan, J. Shabani, and E. Rossi,
Microwave-tunable diode effect in asymmetric SQUIDs

19
with topological Josephson junctions, Phys. Rev. Res.
6, 023011 (2024).
[45] P. K. Sivakumar, M. T. Ahari, J.-K. Kim, Y. Wu,
A. Dixit, G. J. de Coster, A. K. Pandeya, M. J. Gilbert,
and S. S. P. Parkin, Long-range phase coherence and
tunable second order φ0 -josephson effect in a Dirac
semimetal 1t − ptte2 (2024), arXiv:2403.19445 [condmat.supr-con].
[46] T. Karabassov, I. V. Bobkova, V. S. Stolyarov, V. M.
Silkin, and A. S. Vasenko, Competitive helical bands
and highly efficient diode effect in F/S/TI/S/F hybrid
structures (2025), arXiv:2407.14852 [cond-mat.suprcon].
[47] E. Nikodem, J. Schluck, M. Geier, M. Papaj, H. F. Legg,
J. Feng, M. Bagchi, L. Fu, and Y. Ando, Tunable superconducting diode effect in a topological nano-squid
(2025), arXiv:2412.16569 [cond-mat.supr-con].
[48] R. Haenel and O. Can, Superconducting diode
from flux biased josephson junction arrays (2022),
arXiv:2212.02657 [cond-mat.supr-con].
[49] M. Gupta, G. V. Graziano, M. Pendharkar, J. T. Dong,
C. P. Dempsey, C. Palmstrøm, and V. S. Pribiag, Gatetunable superconducting diode effect in a three-terminal
Josephson device, Nat. Commun. 14, 3078 (2023).
[50] A. M. Bozkurt, J. Brookman, V. Fatemi, and A. R.
Akhmerov, Double-Fourier engineering of Josephson
energy-phase relationships applied to diodes, SciPost
Phys. 15, 204 (2023).
[51] Ya. V. Fominov and D. S. Mikhailov, Asymmetric
higher-harmonic SQUID as a Josephson diode, Phys.
Rev. B 106, 134514 (2022).
[52] R. S. Souto, M. Leijnse, and C. Schrade, Josephson
diode effect in supercurrent interferometers, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 129, 267702 (2022).
[53] C. Ciaccia, R. Haller, A. C. C. Drachmann, T. Lindemann, M. J. Manfra, C. Schrade, and C. Schönenberger,
Gate-tunable Josephson diode in proximitized InAs supercurrent interferometers, Phys. Rev. Res. 5, 033131
(2023).
[54] M. Coraiola, A. E. Svetogorov, D. Z. Haxell, D. Sabonis,
M. Hinderling, S. C. ten Kate, E. Cheah, F. Krizek,
R. Schott, W. Wegscheider, J. C. Cuevas, W. Belzig,
and F. Nichele, Flux-tunable Josephson diode effect in
a hybrid four-terminal Josephson junction, ACS Nano
18, 9221 (2024).
[55] P. Zhang, A. Zarassi, L. Jarjat, V. V. de Sande,
M. Pendharkar, J. S. Lee, C. P. Dempsey, A. P. McFadden, S. D. Harrington, J. T. Dong, H. Wu, A. H. Chen,
M. Hocevar, C. J. Palmstrøm, and S. M. Frolov, Large
second-order Josephson effect in planar superconductorsemiconductor junctions, SciPost Phys. 16, 030 (2024).
[56] X. Wu, J.-Y. Wang, H. Su, S. Yan, D. Pan, J. Zhao,
P. Zhang, and H. Q. Xu, Tunable superconducting diode
effect in higher-harmonic InSb nanosheet interferometers, New J. Phys. 27, 023031 (2025).
[57] A. A. Golubov, M. Yu. Kupriyanov, and E. Il’ichev,
The current-phase relation in Josephson junctions, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 76, 411 (2004).
[58] K. K. Likharev, Superconducting weak links, Rev. Mod.
Phys. 51, 101 (1979).
[59] K. K. Likharev and L. A. Yakobson, Steady-state properties of superconducting bridges, Zh. Tekhn. Fiz. 45,
1503 (1975), [Sov. Phys.-Tekhn. Phys. 20, 950 (1975)].
[60] A. G. P. Troeman, S. H. W. van der Ploeg, E. Il’Ichev,

H.-G. Meyer, A. A. Golubov, M. Yu. Kupriyanov,
and H. Hilgenkamp, Temperature dependence measurements of the supercurrent-phase relationship in niobium
nanobridges, Phys. Rev. B 77, 024509 (2008).
[61] N. Ligato, E. Strambini, F. Paolucci, and F. Giazotto,
Preliminary demonstration of a persistent Josephson
phase-slip memory cell with topological protection, Nat.
Commun. 12, 5200 (2021).
[62] W. Wernsdorfer, From micro- to nano-SQUIDs: applications to nanomagnetism, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 22,
064013 (2009).
[63] C. Granata and A. Vettoliere, Nano Superconducting Quantum Interference device: A powerful tool for
nanoscale investigations, Phys. Rep. 614, 1 (2016).
[64] K. Hasselbach, D. Mailly, and J. R. Kirtley, Microsuperconducting quantum interference device characteristics, J. Appl. Phys. 91, 4432 (2002).
[65] D. S. Hopkins, D. Pekker, P. M. Goldbart, and
A. Bezryadin, Quantum interference device made by
DNA templating of superconducting nanowires, Science
308, 1762 (2005).
[66] H. Dausy, L. Nulens, B. Raes, M. J. Van Bael, and
J. Van de Vondel, Impact of kinetic inductance on
the critical-current oscillations of nanobridge SQUIDs,
Phys. Rev. Appl. 16, 024013 (2021).
[67] L. Nulens, H. Dausy, M. J. Wyszyński, B. Raes, M. J.
Van Bael, M. V. Milošević, and J. Van de Vondel,
Metastable states and hidden phase slips in nanobridge
SQUIDs, Phys. Rev. B 106, 134518 (2022).
[68] A. Murphy and A. Bezryadin, Asymmetric nanowire
SQUID: Linear current-phase relation, stochastic
switching, and symmetries, Phys. Rev. B 96, 094507
(2017).
[69] D. Margineda, A. Crippa, E. Strambini, Y. Fukaya,
M. T. Mercaldo, M. Cuoco, and F. Giazotto, Sign reversal diode effect in superconducting Dayem nanobridges,
Commun. Phys. 6, 343 (2023).
[70] A. Greco, Q. Pichard, and F. Giazotto, Josephson diode
effect in monolithic dc-SQUIDs based on 3D Dayem
nanobridges, Appl. Phys. Lett. 123, 092601 (2023).
[71] K. Misaki and N. Nagaosa, Theory of the nonreciprocal
Josephson effect, Phys. Rev. B 103, 245302 (2021).
[72] H. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, P. K. Sivakumar, C. Pasco,
U. Filippozzi, S. S. P. Parkin, Y.-J. Zeng, T. McQueen,
and M. N. Ali, The field-free Josephson diode in a van
der Waals heterostructure, Nature 604, 653 (2022).
[73] J. F. Steiner, L. Melischek, M. Trahms, K. J. Franke,
and F. von Oppen, Diode effects in current-biased
Josephson junctions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 130, 177002
(2023).
[74] G. S. Seleznev and Ya. V. Fominov, Influence of capacitance and thermal fluctuations on the Josephson diode
effect in asymmetric higher-harmonic SQUIDs, Phys.
Rev. B 110, 104508 (2024).
[75] K. K. Likharev, Dynamics of Josephson Junctions and
Circuits (Gordon and Breach, New York, 1986).
[76] A. Barone and G. Paterno, Physics and Applications of
the Josephson Effect (Wiley, New York, 1982).
[77] M. Valentini, O. Sagi, L. Baghumyan, T. de Gijsel, J. Jung, S. Calcaterra, A. Ballabio, J. Aguilera Servin, K. Aggarwal, M. Janik, T. Adletzberger,
R. Seoane Souto, M. Leijnse, J. Danon, C. Schrade,
E. Bakkers, D. Chrastina, G. Isella, and G. Katsaros,
Parity-conserving Cooper-pair transport and ideal su-

20
perconducting diode in planar germanium, Nat. Commun. 15, 169 (2024).
[78] Y. Li, D. Yan, Y. Hong, H. Sheng, A. Wang, Z. Dou,
X. Guo, X. Shi, Z. Su, Z. Lyu, T. Qian, G. Liu,
F. Qu, K. Jiang, Z. Wang, Y. Shi, Z.-A. Xu, J. Hu,
L. Lu, and J. Shen, Interfering Josephson diode effect in
Ta2 Pd3 Te5 asymmetric edge interferometer, Nat. Commun. 15, 9031 (2024).
[79] C. Ciaccia, R. Haller, A. C. C. Drachmann, T. Lindemann, M. J. Manfra, C. Schrade, and C. Schönenberger,
Charge-4e supercurrent in a two-dimensional InAs-Al
superconductor-semiconductor heterostructure, Commun. Phys. 7, 41 (2024).
[80] A. Leblanc, C. Tangchingchai, Z. S. Momtaz,
E. Kiyooka, J.-M. Hartmann, G. T. Fernandez-Bada,
Z. Scherübl, B. Brun, V. Schmitt, S. Zihlmann, R. Maurand, E. Dumur, S. De Franceschi, and F. Lefloch, From
nonreciprocal to charge-4e supercurrent in Ge-based
Josephson devices with tunable harmonic content, Phys.
Rev. Res. 6, 033281 (2024).
[81] I. Babich, A. Kudriashov, D. Baranov, and V. S. Stolyarov, Limitations of the current–phase relation measurements by an asymmetric dc-SQUID, Nano Lett. 23,
6713 (2023).
[82] V. V. Schmidt, The Physics of Superconductors
(Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 1997).
[83] R. C. Dinsmore, III, M.-H. Bae, and A. Bezryadin,
Fractional order Shapiro steps in superconducting
nanowires, Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 192505 (2008).
[84] N. Fujimaki, Y. Okabe, and S. Okamura, Phase-locking
and microwave impedance of Josephson junctions with
linear-periodic current-phase relations, J. Appl. Phys.
51, 3409 (1980).
[85] E. Trabaldo, R. Arpaia, M. Arzeo, E. Andersson,
D. Golubev, F. Lombardi, and T. Bauch, Transport and
noise properties of YBCO nanowire based nanoSQUIDs,
Supercond. Sci. Technol. 32, 073001 (2019).
[86] D. Hazra, L. M. A. Pascal, H. Courtois, and A. K.
Gupta, Hysteresis in superconducting short weak links
and µ-SQUIDs, Phys. Rev. B 82, 184530 (2010).
[87] A. Blois, S. Rozhko, L. Hao, J. C. Gallop, and E. J.
Romans, Heat propagation models for superconducting nanobridges at millikelvin temperatures, Supercond.
Sci. Technol. 30, 014003 (2016).
[88] V. S. Stolyarov, D. S. Yakovlev, S. N. Kozlov,
O. V. Skryabina, D. S. Lvov, A. I. Gumarov, O. V.
Emelyanova, P. S. Dzhumaev, I. V. Shchetinin, R. A.
Hovhannisyan, S. V. Egorov, A. M. Kokotin, W. V.
Pogosov, V. V. Ryazanov, M. Yu. Kupriyanov, A. A.
Golubov, and D. Roditchev, Josephson current mediated by ballistic topological states in Bi2 Te2.3 Se0.7 single nanocrystals, Commun. Mater. 1, 38 (2020).
[89] C. D. Shelly, P. See, I. Rungger, and J. M. Williams, Existence of Shapiro steps in the dissipative regime in superconducting weak links, Phys. Rev. Appl. 13, 024070

(2020).
[90] A. De Cecco, K. Le Calvez, B. Sacépé, C. B. Winkelmann, and H. Courtois, Interplay between electron overheating and ac Josephson effect, Phys. Rev. B 93,
180505 (2016).
[91] S. Biswas, C. B. Winkelmann, H. Courtois, and A. K.
Gupta, Josephson coupling in the dissipative state of a
thermally hysteretic µ-SQUID, Phys. Rev. B 98, 174514
(2018).
[92] M. J. Stephen, Noise in a driven Josephson oscillator,
Phys. Rev. 186, 393 (1969).
[93] R. L. Kautz, Noise, chaos, and the Josephson voltage
standard, Rep. Prog. Phys. 59, 935 (1996).
[94] V. Ambegaokar and B. I. Halperin, Voltage due to thermal noise in the dc Josephson effect, Phys. Rev. Lett.
22, 1364 (1969).
[95] C. M. Falco, W. H. Parker, S. E. Trullinger, and P. K.
Hansma, Effect of thermal noise on current-voltage
characteristics of Josephson junctions, Phys. Rev. B 10,
1865 (1974).
[96] A. R. Bishop and S. E. Trullinger, Josephson-junction
threshold viewed as a critical point, Phys. Rev. B 17,
2175 (1978).
[97] Yu. M. Ivanchenko and L. A. Zil’berman, The Josephson
effect in small tunnel contacts, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 55,
2395 (1968), [Sov. Phys. JETP 28, 1272 (1969)].
[98] A. Blois, S. Rozhko, L. Hao, J. C. Gallop, and E. J.
Romans, Proximity effect bilayer nano superconducting
quantum interference devices for millikelvin magnetometry, J. Appl. Phys. 114, 233907 (2013).
[99] J. Romijn, T. M. Klapwijk, M. J. Renne, and J. E.
Mooij, Critical pair-breaking current in superconducting aluminum strips far below Tc , Phys. Rev. B 26, 3648
(1982).
[100] P. Dubos, H. Courtois, B. Pannetier, F. K. Wilhelm,
A. D. Zaikin, and G. Schön, Josephson critical current
in a long mesoscopic SNS junction, Phys. Rev. B 63,
064502 (2001).
[101] A. D. Zaikin and G. F. Zharkov, Theory of wide dirty
SNS junctions, Fiz. Nizk. Temp. 7, 375 (1981), [Sov. J.
Low Temp. Phys. 7, 184 (1981)].
[102] E. A. Early, A. F. Clark, and C. J. Lobb, Physical basis
for half-integral Shapiro steps in a DC SQUID, Physica C 245, 308 (1995).
[103] S. Yu. Grebenchuk, R. Cattaneo, and V. M. Krasnov, Nonlocal long-range synchronization of planar
Josephson-junction arrays, Phys. Rev. Appl. 17, 064032
(2022).
[104] D. Yu. Kazmin, V. D. Esin, A. V. Timonina, N. N.
Kolesnikov, and E. V. Deviatov, Fractional a. c. Josephson effect as evidence of topological hinge states in a
Dirac semimetal NiTe2 , Zh. Exp. Teor. Fiz. 166, 688
(2024).

