arXiv:1503.04676v2 [quant-ph] 8 Jun 2015

Observation of elliptical rings in Type-I
spontaneous parametric down-conversion
Hannah Guilbert, Yu-Po Wong, Daniel J. Gauthier
June 9, 2015
Abstract
We investigate the transverse spatial profile of down-converted light
produced by noncollinear, degenerate, Type-I spontaneous parametric
down-conversion in two types of nonlinear crystals. We find that the
pattern produced by one crystal, beta barium borate (BBO), produces
a circular down-conversion pattern while the other crystal, bismuth triborate (BiBO) produces an elliptical pattern. We show this difference is
due to the angle-independent refractive index experienced by the daughter photons in BBO, while they experience an angle-dependent refractive
index in BiBO. We image the transverse spatial profile of the generated
light to determine the eccentricity produced by each crystal and develop a
model to explain our observation. Among other things, this model predicts
that there is a wavelength for which the eccentricity from BiBO is nearly
zero. Finally, we discuss how the elliptical ring pattern produced in BiBO
potentially affects polarization entanglement for experimental setups that
collect biphotons around the entire down-conversion ring. We show that
the quality of polarization entanglement as measured by the overlap integral of the spectrum of the two rings, can remain high (> 99.4%) around
the entire ring at the expense of decreased biphoton rate.

1

Introduction

The nonlinear optical process of spontaneous parametric down-conversion (SPDC)
is a popular method for producing correlated photon pairs, also referred to as
biphotons or daughter photons. A major advantage of this process is the ability
to quantum mechanically entangle the daughter photons in various degreesof-freedom including polarization, time, frequency, space, and momentum, for
example. The entanglement quality can be very high, making it an attractive source for applications in quantum communication, such as quantum key
distribution (QKD) [1, 2, 3], as well as experiments in fundamental quantum
information science [4, 5].
In the SPDC process, a pump photon (p) enters a nonlinear optical crystal
and is annihilated, producing two daughter photons, typically called signal (s)
and idler (i). Energy conservation dictates that ωp = ωs + ωi . To be an efficient
1

B

C
A

A
C

B

Figure 1: The dark circle illustrates the down-conversion ring. Points A, B, and
C represent pairs of daughter photons at different azimuthal angles around the
ring. To increase the total count rate, one should collect from multiple points
around the ring. This idea is called spatial multiplexing.
process, the photons must also abide by momentum conservation, a condition
referred to as phase matching. In noncollinear SPDC, the daughter photons are
emitted into angles on either side of the pump direction in order to satisfy this
phase matching relation. In degenerate SPDC where ωs = ωi , this emission
occurs in opposite pairs of directions around the pump beam forming a ring,
called the down-conversion ring, in a plane transverse to the pump.
In many experiments aimed at creating entangled photons pairs, the polarization degree-of-freedom is used because the measurement process is straightforward and very high purity can be achieved. Because current QKD schemes
aim at maximizing photon rates, methods of creating high brightness polarizationentangled sources have been investigated [6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. A potential solution
involves using Type-I phase matching, where the two daughter photons have
the same polarization that is opposite to the pump. Recently, Rangarajan et
al. [11] showed that high-brightness polarization entanglement can be achieved
in Type-I phase matching when two thin crystals are placed together with their
optic axes rotated 90◦ with respect to each other [10, 11]. Originally, the process was demonstrated in beta barium borate (BBO, a uniaxial crystal) [9, 10],
but later shown for bismuth triborate, (BiBO, a biaxial crystal) [11] which is
quite promising for high-brighness applications because of its higher nonlinear
coefficient [12, 13].
Each crystal produces the same polarization but there is essentially no whichpath information regarding the crystal in which the photons are generated. This
process can give rise to polarization entanglement around the entire ring, if the
rings overlap everywhere. This enables higher achievable fluxes by allowing for
collection of biphotons at multiple pairs of points around the down-conversion
ring, known as spatial multiplexing and illustrated in Fig. 1.
To achieve entanglement around the whole ring, the collected light must be
indistinguishable. This only occurs when the emmission patterns are completely

2

circular because any eccentricity of the ring from the first crystal will have its
major axis perpendicular to the major axis from the ring produced in the second
crystal. This leads to reduced spatial overlap and reduced entanglement.
Although BiBO is a promising crystal for high-brightness SPDC applications, we find that the emission pattern produced from a Type-I interaction
with BiBO is elliptical. Eccentricity introduces a possible way of distinguishing photons that were born in the first crystal from those born in the second,
thereby potentially reducing the entanglement quality around the entire ring.
In the next section, we develop a formalism for predicting theoretically the
emission pattern for noncollinear degenerate Type-I SPDC in BiBO and discuss
the physical reason for elliptical emission patterns. In Sec. 3, we discuss our
experimental setup and present our data. In Sec. 4, we discuss a theoretical
model for predicting the eccentricity in a biaxial crystal. We show that this
model agrees with our experimental data and that there is a wavelength that
minimizes the eccentricity for a given set of emission angles. In Sec. 5, we
discuss the repercussions of elliptical rings on the entanglement quality and
brightness and further show how the spectrum of the single photons changes as
a result of the asymmetry.

2

Phase Matching for Type-I SPDC in BBO and
BiBO

The phase matching process for SPDC determines the emission direction of the
daughter photons. In general, perfect phase matching occurs when
~kp = ~ks + ~ki ,
where

(1)

~kj = nj (ωj , ŝj )ωj ŝj ,
(2)
c
for j = (p, s, i), where the angle- and frequency-dependent refractive index is
given by nj (ωj , ŝj ), ŝj is the propagation direction unit vector, and c is the
speed of light in vacuum. We follow the geometry, notations, and conventions
in Refs. [14, 15]. The crystal geometry and photon wavevectors and angles
are shown in Fig. 2(a). A pump photon with wavevector k~p is incident on a
nonlinear crystal and makes angles (θp , φp ) with the optic axis of the crystal
denoted “OA-U” (“OA-B”) for a uniaxial (biaxial) crystal, discussed in more
~ is emitted at local
detail below. The signal (idler) photon with wavevector ks(i)
angles (θs(i) , φs(i) ) with respect to k~p . For perfect phase matching, φs = φi + π.
The photons undergo refraction at the air-crystal interface and exit at exterior
0
angles of θs(i)
.
To determine the emission angles (θs , θi , φs , φi ) of the daughter photons,
we choose frequencies (ωp , ωs , ωi ) as well as the angles the pump wavevector
makes with the optic axis (θp , φp ). Using the Sellmeier equations for either

3

(a)

OA-B

OA-U
OA-B
ki

z
φp=0

θi
θs

θp
x

θi'
φi

kp

φs
θs'
φ=0

(b)

ks

θs' (deg)

3.52
3.51

BBO

3.50
BiBO

3.49
3.48
3.47
0

60

120

180 240 300 360
φs (deg)

Figure 2: (a) Crystal geometry for BBO and BiBO crystals. The pump makes
angles (θp , φp ) with respect to the crystal optic axis. Here, φp = 0. The signal
(idler) photons are emitted at local angles (θs(i) , φs(i) ) with respect to ~kp . Re0
fraction at the interface of the crystal results in an exterior angle of θs(i)
outside
the crystal. (b) The exterior emission angle versus its local azimuthal angle for
BiBO (blue, solid line) and BBO (maroon, dashed line). For BBO, we use a
pump cut angle of θp = 29.392◦ while for BiBO we use φp = 90◦ , θp = 151.563◦ .
Both curves are calculated using λp = 405 nm and λs = λi = 810 nm.
BBO or BiBO, we solve for either set of parameters by finding a solution to the
simultaneous equation [14]
(∆kx )2 + (∆ky )2 + (∆kz )2 = 0,

(3)

∆kz = 0,

(4)

and
where, for example, ∆kz = kpz − ksz − kiz . Evaluating Eqs. 3 and 4 involves the
refractive index for each photon propagating through the crystal, which depends
on the polarization of the photons, and the propagation direction.
In a uniaxial crystal, which has a single axis of symmetry, an ordinarypolarized photon (o-polarized) is polarized perpendicular to the plane that con4

tains its propagation wavevector and the optic axis of the crystal. This photon
experiences a refractive index that does not change with the direction of propagation. The extraordinary-polarized photon (e-polarized) is polarized in the
plane of the optic axis and the propagation vector and experiences an angledependent refractive index. Type-I interactions, such as those considered here,
include interactions where the pump is an e-polarized photon and the daughter
photons are o-polarized, or vice versa.
A biaxial crystal, such as BiBO, has two optic axes and reduced symmetry.
Polarized photons are neither e-polarized or o-polarized in the sense of a uniaxial
crystal. Depending on type of crystal and wavelength range, polarized photons
may experience either an angle-dependent or angle-independent refractive index.
The photons are said to be either “fast” or “slow” instead of “e” or “o” where
fast (slow) refers to having a smaller (larger) refractive index [15].
Determining the fast (slow) refractive indices involves finding the length of
the minor (major) axes of the optical indicatrix given by Fresnel’s equation of
wave normals given by
s2y
s2z
s2x
+
= 0,
−2
−2 + −2
−2
−2
n (ω, ŝ) − nx
n (ω, ŝ) − ny
n (ω, ŝ) − n−2
z

(5)

where nx , ny , nz are the refractive indices in each principle direction of the crystal at a given vacuum frequency and n(ω, ŝ) is the refractive index in a given
direction with unit vector ŝ. For a negative biaxial crystal, such as BiBO,
nx < ny < nz . Solving Eq. 5 for n(ω, ŝ) using the approach described in
Ref. [14], we obtain two solutions, one for each polarization (fast and slow). In
BiBO we find that the pump photons experience the fast refractive index that is
angle-independent for wavelengths in the UV and blue part of the spectrum. In
contrast, the daughter photons in the red and NIR part of the spectrum experience the slow refractive index that is angle-dependent. In BBO, pump photons
in the blue part of the spectrum travel as e-polarized photons, and experience
an angle-dependent refractive index, while the signal and idler photons are opolarized and experience an angle-independent refractive index. This effect is
not due to the uniaxial versus biaxial nature of the crystals, but simply due to
the angle dependence on the refractive index over certain wavelength ranges for
each particular crystal.
Our analysis of the elliptical emission pattern for BiBO has not been noted or
observed previously. This may be due to the fact that most previous quantum
optics experiments have been conducted with BBO, which produces circular
rings as observed and predicted below. This is not the case in BiBO due to
the angle-dependent refractive index experienced by the daughter photons. In
Fig. 2(b) we plot the external angle θs0 as a function of its azimuthal angle φs
for BiBO (blue, solid) and BBO (maroon, dashed). For BiBO, we observe that
θs0 varies with φs so that θs0 has a larger value at φs = 0◦ and 180◦ than in the
φs = 90◦ and 270◦ directions. This leads to an elliptical emission pattern for
this crystal. For BBO, θs0 is a constant as a function of φs , which implies a
circular emission pattern. In our analysis, we ignore birefringent walk-off of the
5

beams due to its negligible contribution for the thin crystals considered here, as
discussed in detail in the Appendix.

3

Experimental Results

We image the spatial intensity patterns from both BiBO and BBO using the
experimental setup shown in Fig. 3. A 405-nm-wavelength, continuous-wave
laser pumps either a BBO or BiBO crystal. Both types of crystals are thin
(0.8 mm) in comparison to the Rayleigh length and compared to the transverse
extent of the imaged rings - a requirement for polarization entanglement. As
the crystals become thick, which-path information begins to degrade the entanglement because the rings become distinguishable. We test two different BiBO
crystals each with a different set of crystal cut angles (θp , φp ) designed to be
phase matched for λp = 405 nm and λs = λi = 810 nm with an exterior opening angle of ∼ 3◦ . These two crystal cut angles are the angles for which it is
straight-forward to create an optical beam that propagates through the crystal
with negligible walk-off. That is, φp is chosen so that the pump, signal, and
idler photons essentially propagate as a slow or a fast wave. We can further tilt
the crystal around θp to tune the opening angle. One crystal has cut angles of
φp = 90◦ , θp = 151.7◦ while the other has φp = 0◦ , θp = 51◦ . The BBO crystal
has a pump cut angle of θp = 29.3◦ .
Object plane
λ/2

Filter
EMCCD
BiBO/BBO
Lens

405 nm

Zoom lens

Figure 3:
Experimental setup.
A 405 nm laser (Omicron,
LDM405.120.CWA.L.WS, < 0.02nm bandwidth FWHM) pumps either a
BiBO or BBO crystal (Newlight Photonics). The down-converted light exits
the crystal and propagates 12.4 cm before it passes through a 40 cm focal
length lens (Thorlabs LAC726B). This lens functions to direct the rays from
the down-conversion ring to an object plane that we image onto the camera.
We image the ring ∼ 10 cm after this lens by placing a zoom lens (Navitar
Zoom 7000E) on an EMCCD (Andor iXonEM ) ∼ 1 m away from the lens. The
magnification of this imaging system is 8.6. Each pixel on the camera chip
is 24 µm × 24 µm, the sensitive area of the chip is 3 mm × 3 mm, and we
cool the chip down to −70◦ C to reduce dark noise. We put a 10 nm bandpass
optical filter (Andover 810FS10-50) before the camera lens to select only nearly
degenerate wavelengths.

6

Making precise measurements of the eccentricity requires having the wellcalibrated imaging system, depicted in Fig. 3. To achieve this, we perform
the following procedure: first we remove the crystal and the 40 cm focal length
lens, leaving only the laser, a set of apertures for alignment, steering mirrors,
and camera-lens system. We then place a flat mirror against the camera lens to
ensure the back-reflected light is going straight back through the apertures. We
then place a target in the object plane. The target is a flat piece of metal with
a 20-mm-diameter ring scored in the surface of the metal, where the diameter
tolerances is ∼ 25 µm. This machined ring has a hole in the center so that
we can easily align it with the laser beam path and check its back reflections
for tilt. We check the eccentricity of the target and make small adjustments to
the camera’s position and tilt until we minimize eccentricity. The eccentricity is
caused primarily by any amount of tilt in the system, which arises from imperfect
alignment. Astigmatism and coma also arise from an imperfectly aligned optical
system, although these are negligible compared to the tilt for a well-aligned
optical system. We then replace the crystal and check back reflections with a
mirror on the camera lens. Finally, we add in the lens and ensure its alignment
by checking back reflections.
We collect images for each crystal and fit the observed emission pattern
with an elliptical function in two transverse dimensions with a Gaussian profile
in the longitudinal dimension. The free parameters of our model include the
height of the Gaussian peak, background counts (offset of the Gaussian from
0), major/minor axes for ellipse, width of Gaussian and location of the center
point. We calculate the eccentricity of the ellipse by
r
 a 2
,
(6)
= 1−
b
where b (a) is the major (minor) axis of the ellipse.
Figure 4 shows the transverse spatial intensity pattern for down-conversion
rings from both BBO and BiBO crystals. For BBO, the intensity pattern of
the down-conversion ring is essentially circular (Fig. 4 (a)),  = 0±0.013 where
the error is a combined statistical and systematic error of 0.013, which will be
discussed below. Hence, our results indicate the pattern for BBO is circular
to within our experimental uncertainties. The range of opening angles that
are phase matched for BBO is smaller than that for BiBO because the slope
of the opening angle versus wavelength is larger in BBO due to the slope of
the refractive index versus angle being steeper. This leads to a thinner downconversion ring for BBO. For BiBO cut at phase matching angles φp = 90◦ , θp =
151.7◦ , (Fig. 4, (b)), the eccentricity is greater than that for BBO, with  =
0.172 ± 0.019. For BiBO, with φp = 0◦ , θp = 51◦ (Fig. 4 (c)),  = 0.367 ± 0.012
and is easily seen by eye.
Table 1 gives the results of our observations and analysis. We calculate the
major/minor axes using the experimental values for θs0 (φs = 0)/θs0 (φs = 90) and
Eq. 7. Using the procedure outlined in Sec. 2, we calculate theoretical values
for the eccentricity using an exterior angle for either the major or minor axis

7

BBO

y (mm)

3

(a)

2
1
ε = 0.013 ±0.013

0
0

1
2
x (mm)

3

BiBO
(b)

(c)

ε = 0.367± 0.011

ε = 0.172± 0.017
0

1
(d)

2
x (mm)

3

0

1
(d)

2
x (mm)

3

Figure 4: SPDC emission pattern for BBO and BiBO. The emission pattern
from the camera is plotted versus the two transverse dimensions (x and y)
where y is in the direction perpendicular to the optical table. The patterns
from the camera have been scaled up by the magnification and converted from
pixels into cm. The red, solid lines are ellipses with the major and minor axes
taken from the fit parameters. (a) Down-conversion ring from BBO crystal is
nearly circular with an eccentricity of 0.013. (b) Down-conversion ring BiBO
crystal cut at phase matching angle of (θp = 151.7◦ , φp = 90◦ ) has a higher
eccentricity with the major axis in the x-direction. (c) Down-conversion ring in
BiBO crystal cut at phase matching angle of (θp = 51◦ , φp = 0◦ ) has a large
eccentricity.
given in the first column. The exterior angle is what we measure experimentally
and is simply the opening angles in the crystal propagated outside the crystal
Snell’s law. We use this set exterior angle to calculate the θp and φp that gives
this value at either φs = 0 or φs = 90◦ . In this case, instead of knowing θp and
calculating θs and θi , we know the latter and calculate the former. Measuring
the external emission angle is more straightforward than measuring the angle
the pump beam makes with the crystal optic axis. Once we determine θp , we
use it to predict the emission angle around the entire ring. Using Snell’s law,
we propagate these angles outside the crystal and find the eccentricity through

8

Table 1: Experimental Data

θ 0 (φ =0)

Experiment θ0s(φss=90) (◦ )
s

Theory

Error
Statistical
Systematic

BBO

BiBO
φp = 90◦

BiBO
φp = 0◦

4.12358
4.12382

4.0294
4.10893

4.05449
4.31798

0.013
0

0.172
0.166

0.360
0.361

0.011
0.007

0.001
0.019

0.001
0.012

the relation,
s
=


1−

tan[θs0 (φs = 0◦ )]
tan[θs0 (φs = 90◦ )]

±2
,

(7)

where the ± accounts for the possibility that the axes at φs = 0 may be the
major or the minor axis. We use Eq. 7 to calculate both experimental and
theoretical values for . For the experimental values, we have measured both
tan[θs0 (φs = 90◦ )] and tan[θs0 (φs = 0◦ )], while for the theoretical values, we use
only one of these, either tan[θs0 (φs = 90◦ )] or tan[θs0 (φs = 0◦ )] and calculate the
other by the procedure described above. The error in our experiments includes
a statistical error from the fitting process and a systematic error, which is most
likely due to small astigmatism in the system. We calculate the systematic error
by taking repeated measurements at different times which requires realignment
using the alignment procedure outlined above.

4

Theoretical Model

In this section we outline a theoretical model for predicting the approximate
eccentricity of the emission pattern in each crystal. Because our emission angles are small (θs , θi << 1), a small-angle approximation around the collinear
case (θs = θi = 0) is a natural method for obtaining an approximate analytic
solution. This allows us to gain better understanding of the parameters that
affect the eccentricity. Starting from the phase matching equations in the y and
z directions, we find that the phase matching occurs when,
ns cos(θs ) + ni cos(θi ) − 2np = 0,

(8)

ns sin(θs ) + ni sin(θi ) = 0.

(9)

We expand sin(θj ), cos(θj ), ns , and ni to second order in θj . The approxi-

9

mate expressions of the refractive indices are given by,
ns ≈ ñs +

∂ ñs
∂ ñs
1 ∂ 2 ñs 2
δθ +
δθp +
θs +
∂θp
∂θs
2 ∂θp2 p

(10)

∂ 2 ñs
1 ∂ 2 ñs 2
θ ,
δθp θs +
∂θp ∂θs
2 ∂θs2 s
ni ≈ ñs +

∂ ñs
∂ ñs
1 ∂ 2 ñs 2
δθ −
δθp −
θi +
∂θp
∂θs
2 ∂θp2 p

(11)

∂ 2 ñs
1 ∂ 2 ñs 2
θ ,
δθp θi +
∂θp ∂θs
2 ∂θs2 i
where θp = θp0 + δθp is the pump phase matching angle, θp0 is the pump
phase matching angle for the collinear degenerate case and δθp is a small variation around that angle. The notation n˜s describes the refractive index for the
collinear degenerate case, and n˜s has replaced ñi everywhere because for the
collinear degenerate case, they are equal. The change in refractive index with
angle is calculated from the expression for the frequency and directional dependent refractive index. These quantities indicate how quickly the refractive index
changes with the various angles. Inserting Eqs. 11 and ?? and the trigonometric
functions into Eqs. 8 and 9, we solve for angles θs and θi . We are interested in
solving for δθs and δθi which are small changes in the emissions angles around
the values of θs (φs = 90◦ ) and θs (φs = 0◦ ), which are the angles corresponding
to the directions of the major and minor axes. We use the expression
θs,(i) = θs (φs = 90◦ ) + δθs,(i) ,

(12)

to solve for δθs(φs = 0◦ ) and δθs (φs = 180◦ ). We calculate the eccentricity
inside the crystal to be
s

2
δθs (φs = 0◦ ) + δθs (φs = 180◦ )
.
(13)
= 1−
2θs (φs = 90◦ )
The eccentricity arrises from the photons experiencing the angle-dependent refractive index, so the eccentricity in the emission pattern is only due to the
eccentricity inside the crystal. Once the photons propagate into free-space,
they experience no angle-dependence and simply follow the trajectories of the
external angles dictated by Snell’s law. Therefore, the eccentricity inside the
crystal is the only contribution to the eccentricity experimentally measured.
Using Eq. 13, we determine the predicted value of the eccentricity using the
measured values for δθp . These are shown in the final columns of Table 1. For
small values of δθp , we also express the eccentricity in terms of the derivatives
of refractive indices as,

φ =0 2
 2 φs =0  2 φs =90◦
∂ n˜s
2
∂ n˜s s
∂ n˜s
−
−
,
(14)
≈
∂θs2
∂θs2
n˜s
∂θs
10

Refractive Index Derivatives

0.20

1

0.15
0.10
0.05

2

0.00

3

-0.05
600

700

800

900

λ (nm)

Figure 5: Plot of each term in Eq.14 versus wavelength, “1” (blue, short-dash)
◦
(∂ 2 n˜s /∂θs2 )φs =0 “2” (red, long-dash) (∂ 2 n˜s /∂θs2 )φs =90 , “3” (green, solid) 2/n˜s ∗
φs =0 2
◦
[(∂ n˜s /∂θs )
] . For this plot we use φp = 90 , θp = 152.077◦ .
where the superscripts of φs denote the azimuthal angle at which the terms are
evaluated. We plot the three terms in this approximation in Fig. 5. For this
plot, the difference between the curves “1” and “2” is the dominant contribution
to the eccentricity. Where these curves intersect is where the eccentricity is at a
minimum in Fig. 6. This expression allows us to determine why eccentricity is
larger for certain crystal cuts than others. We examine the relative size of each
of the three terms in Eq. 14 for the case where φp = 0 and φp = 90◦ . We find
that the difference of the first two terms in Eq. 14 for φp = 0 is very large in
comparison to the difference of the first two terms for the φp = 90◦ case. This
ultimately leads to the larger eccentricity we observe for the φp = 0 crystal cut
in BiBO.
Using this method, we also calculate the value of the degenerate wavelength
(λs = λi ) that minimizes the eccentricity inside the crystal. Again, minimizing
the internal eccentricity will minimize the eccentricity measured in the external
emission pattern. Each of the parameters in Eq. 13 is wavelength-dependent
because the refractive indices for the daughter photons in BiBO are angledependent. We find a minimum wavelength by performing a root-finding routine
on Eq. 13 with wavelength as the independent parameter. We also find the eccentricity as a function of wavelength plotted in Fig. 6 for three different values
of θp . This plot shows that there is a wavelength for each pump tilt angle for
which the eccentricity can be minimized. According to the plot, the eccentricity
becomes large away from the 710-780 nm range. For our degenerate wavelength
of 810 nm, this figure agrees with the value of the eccentricity we observe. This
plot indicates which wavelengths are best at minimizing eccentricity in a given
crystal cut for Type-I degenerate SPDC.

11

0.3
1
3

ε

0.2
2

0.1

0.0
600

700

800

900

1000

1100

λ (nm)

Figure 6: Eccentricity versus wavelength for three different values of θp , “1”
(blue, short-dash) θp = 152.071◦ “2” (green,solid) θp = 151.378◦ , “3” (red,
long-dash) θp = 149.21◦ . For all three plots there is a wavelength for which the
eccentricity of the down-conversion ring is minimized. We show our experimental data for a pump wavelength of 405 nm and a degenerate down-converted
wavelength of 810 nm (purple) with associated error bars.

5

Impact on entanglement and count rate

One potential drawback of an elliptical emission pattern is that it may decrease
the entanglement quality and/or the entangled photon count rate. Because the
rings are elliptical, they no longer perfectly spatially overlap around the entire
ring, leading to potential degradation in entanglement-purity, and limiting the
ability to multiplex many channels around the down-conversion ring. Lack of
spatial overlap is the most obvious way in which which-path information is
revealed. The elliptical shape may also cause a change in the joint spectrum
for the photons, which leads to a degradation in entanglement purity. We note
that spatial overlap can be corrected for by collecting light in between the ring
centroids at the cost of count rate. However, at this location, the spectra from
the two rings is different, leading to decreased entanglement purity. We study
each of these effects in different ways where we assume that the biphotons are
coupled into single mode fibers.
To estimate whether the entanglement quality is degraded, we determine
the spectrum of the down-converted light for each crystal for single mode fiber
collection. Using single mode fibers is important because collection of a single
spatial mode for either the signal or idler photon means that the twin photon
should also be projected onto a single spatial mode. The entanglement purity
can then be determined from the overlap integral of the spectral intensity of
these two single modes. Calculating the spectra from the midpoint between the
rings at two locations and computing the overlap integral provides a measure
12

of distinguishability. A smaller overlap integral represents lower entanglement
quality because the difference in spectra between the crystals means it is possible
to distinguish which crystal the photons came from.
Using the formalism developed in our previous work [17], we determine both
the joint spectrum for the biphoton wavefunction as well as the singles spectrum
for each signal and idler, where we assume single mode fiber collection. Figure
7 (b) shows the joint spectrum at location B in Fig. 7 (a). Here the overlap is
minimal for each crystal in the pair when the crystals are cut at φp = 90◦ , θp =
151.7◦ (solid lines) and φp = 0, θp = 51◦ (dashed lines). In these calculations
we choose one of these points, point A (Fig. 7 (a)) to have maximal overlap
between the two rings, leaving point B to have minimal overlap. We choose
the minimal-overlapped case because the entanglement purity is lowest due to
the mismatched overlap. For the minimal overlap case, we choose the collection
mode to be in between the two rings so that we collect equal count rates from
each and so that the spectra from the two will be most similar. We find that,
for both BiBO crystal cuts, the spectra are similar for the two crystals, and the
entanglement quality is not substantially degraded. The spectra at point A are
identical, while at point B we find the overlap integral is 99.4-99.97% for each of
the two crystal cuts. The overlap integral for two entangled states is a measure
of the entanglement purity of the states involved.
Even though the eccentricity of the ring does not affect the entanglement
purity, it does affect the count rates. Integrating the spectra in Fig. 7 (b) over
∆ω gives the total joint count rate. For the crystal cut at φp = 0, θp = 51◦ , the
spectra has a much lower amplitude and integrating over any band of frequencies
gives a lower count rate compared to the crystal cut at φp = 90◦ , θp = 151.7◦ .
Higher eccentricity causes the rings to be more spatially separated in the former
case, resulting in the lower joint count rate. Additionally, the crystal cut for
this high eccentricity (φp = 0, θp = 51◦ ) has a lower effective nonlinearity (deff )
resulting in an even lower count rate so that this crystal cut is clearly not optimal for high-brightness applications. This may not be the case for other crystals
however. For SPDC applications in BiBO that require both a high count rate
as well as high purity entanglement, we find that the eccentricity does not decrease the entanglement purity significantly, however, the count rate is lower for
collection of the midpoints between emissions patterns with greater eccentricity.
Applications aiming for ultra-high entanglement purity (> 99.99%) are limited
to the locations around the ring that can be made to overlap completely.

6

Conclusions

In conclusion, we show both experimentally and theoretically that the emission patterns from down-conversion in BiBO have an elliptical shape, while
the pattern from BBO has a circular profile. We show that this difference in
shape of the down-conversion rings depends on whether or not the daughter
photons experience an angle-independent or angle-dependent refractive index.
Although, in hindsight, the results we present may seems obvious, this is to our

13

B

(a)

B

θp = 51o
φp = 0 o

A

θp = 151.7o
φp = 90o

A

dR/dωs (10-11 (counts s-1)/s-1)

(b)
2.5
2.0

(2)

1.5

(1)

(3)

1.0

(4)

0.5
0.0
-1.6

-1

1
0
ωs-ωs0 or ωi-ωi0 (1014 s-1)

1.6

Figure 7: (a) Points A and B represent the points of maximal and minimal
overlap respectively. Red inner ring lines and blue outer ring lines illustrate the
center of the emission patterns from each crystal in the crystal pair, where we
have ignored the finite width of the actual ring. The eccentricity of these rings
has been exaggerated for illustration purposes. Left figure depicts crystal cut at
φp = 0, θp = 51◦ and right figure depicts crystal cut at φp = 90◦ , θp = 151.7◦ (b)
Joint spectra for each crystal cut at location B for each crystal cut. The y axis
on the plot is the differential rate per frequency and the x axis is an angular
frequency shift around the degenerate frequency. Solid lines (green (2) and gold
(1)) represent the joint spectral for each crystal when the crystals are cut at
φp = 90◦ , θp = 151.7◦ while the dashed lines (blue (3) and purple (4)) represent
the joint spectra from each crystal when the crystals are cut at φp = 0, θp =
51◦ . The pump wavelength for this simulation is 405 nm and the degenerate
wavelengths 810 nm. The vertical dashed green lines in the plot indicate a 20
nm bandwidth for reference.
knowledge, the first time this effect has ever been characterized and its potential impact discussed. We also present a theoretical method for calculating the
eccentricity of the down-conversion ring for biaxial crystals find that there is an
optimal wavelength for which the eccentricity is a minimum and close to zero.
We demonstrate that the elliptical nature of the rings does not reduce entanglement purity, but reduces joint counts rates significantly for down-conversion
patterns with a larger eccentricity.

14

7

Acknowledgments

The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the DARPA InPho
program and the Office of Naval Research MURI on Fundamental Research on
Wavelength-Agile High-Rate Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) in a Marine
Environment, award #N00014-13-0627.

Appendix
Birefringent walk-off occurs in a medium when, for a particular polarization, the
momentum vector and the Poynting vector separate from each other. Walk-off
occurs in both uniaxial and biaxial crystals, although calculating the walk-off
angle in the biaxial case is more challenging due to the reduced symmetry of
the crystal. We calculate the walk-off angles using the method in Ref. [15], and
find the contribution to the eccentricity from walk-off is negligible, due to the
fact that the crystals considered here are so thin. The crystal thinness means
that photons that are walking off different amounts in different directions will
not cause a large change in eccentricity because their propagation distance to
the crystal face is quite small.
In BiBO, the daughter photons experience an angle-dependent refractive
index, and will therefore have Poynting vector walk-off. Using Eqs. (20)-(22) in
Ref. [15] we determine the Poynting unit vector N̂ and unit propagation vector
k̂. We use these to determine the walk-off angle as a function of azimuthal
angle φs around the original pump direction. We find walk-off angles for the
φp = 90◦ , θp = 151.56◦ crystal cut at φs = 0 and φs = 180◦ are 3.19◦ and
3.51◦ , respectively. The walk-off angles for φs = 90◦ and φs = 270◦ are both
3.36◦ . We map the Poynting vectors and momentum vectors onto the crystal
exit face and compare their eccentricity. We find that the Poynting vectors map
a ring with eccentricity of 0.1680, while the momentum vectors map a ring with
eccentricity 0.1685, which is a 0.3% difference.
In free space, the Poynting vector and momentum vector must be parallel,
so the trajectories of these vectors to the image plane are identical. As we have
shown in the previous paragraph, the eccentricity of the ring as it is about to
exit the crystal is negligible. The photon path outside the crystal is much larger
than the one inside the crystal and as the Poynting vector and momentum vector
are parallel in free-space, the dominant contribution to the eccentricity comes
from the paths taken outside the crystal. Essentially, the overall impact of the
walk-off from intracrystal angles is very small due to the fact that the crystal
length is much smaller than the crystal - lens distance.

References
[1] C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard, “Quantum Cryptography: Public key
distribution and coin tossing,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
15

Conference on Computers, Systems, and Signal Processing, Bangalore, 175
(1984)
[2] A. Ekert, “Quantum cryptography based on Bell’s theorem,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 67, 661-663 (1991).
[3] A. V. Sergienko, M. Atatüre, Z. Walton, G. Jaeger, B. E. A. Saleh, and
M. C. Teich, “Quantum cryptography using femtosecond-pulsed parametric
down-conversion,” Phys. Rev. A 60, R2622–R2625 (1999).
[4] M. Giustina, S. Ramelow, B. Wittmann, J. Kofler, J. Beyer, A. Lita, B.
Calkins, T. Gerrits, S. W. Man, R. Ursin, A. Zeilinger, “Bell Violation
using entangled photons without the fair-sampling assumption,” Nat. 497,
227 (2013).
[5] B. G. Christensen, K. T. McCusker, J. B. Altepeter, B. Calkins, T. Gerrits,
A. E. Lita, A. Miller, L. K. Shalm, Y. Zhang, S. W. Nam, N. Brunner, C. C.
W. Lim, N. Gisin, P. G, Kwiat, Detection-Loophole-Free Test of Quantum
Nonlocality, and Applications,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 130406 (2013).
[6] O. Kwon, Y-W. Cho, and Y-H. Kim, “Single-mode coupling efficiencies of
type-II spontaneous parametric down-conversion: Collinear, noncollinear,
and beamlike phase matching,” Opt. Express 78, 053825 (2008).
[7] M. Fiorentino, C. E. Kuklewicz, F. N. C. Wong, “Source of polarization
entanglement in a single periodically poled KTiOPO4 crystal with overlapping emission cones,” Phys. Rev. A 13, 127-135 (2005).
[8] P. G. Kwiat, K. Mattle, H. Weinfurter, and A. Zeilinger, “New HighIntensity Source of Polarization-Entangled Photon Pairs,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
75, 4337-4341 (1995).
[9] P. G. Kwiat, E. Waks, A.G. White, I. Applebaum, and P. Eberhard, “Ultrabright Source of Polarization-entangled Photons,” Phys. Rev. A 60, R773R776 (1999).
[10] J. Altepeter , E. Jeffrey, and P. Kwiat, “Phase-compensated ultra-bright
source of entangled photons,” Opt. Express 13, 8951-8959 (2005).
[11] R. Rangarajan, M. Goggin, and P. Kwiat, “Optimizing type-I polarizationentangled photons,” Opt. Express 17, 18920-18932 (2009).
[12] H. Hellwig, J. Liebertz, and L. Bohaty, “Exceptional large nonlinear optical
coefficients in the monoclinic bismuth borate BiB3 O6 (BIBO),” Solid State
Commun. 109, 249-251 (1999).
[13] M. Ghotbi and M Ebrahim-Zadeh, “Optical second harmonic generation
properties of BiB3 O6 ,” Opt. Express 12, 6002-6018 (2004).

16

[14] N. Beouff, D. Branning, I. Chaperot, E. Dauler, S. Guerin, G. Jaeger, A.
Muller and A. Migdall, “Calculating characteristics of noncollinear phase
matching in uniaxial and biaxial crystals,” Opt. Eng. 39, 4, 1016-1024
(2000).
[15] D. Roberts, “Simplified Characterization of Uniaxial and Biaxial Nonlinear
Optical Crystals: A Plea for Standardization of Nomenclature and Conventions,” IEEE J. of Quant. Elec. 28, 2057-2071 (1992).
[16] A. Ling, A. Lamas-Linares, and C. Kurtsiefer, “Absolute emission rates of
spontaneous parametric down-conversion into single transverse Gaussian
modes,” Phys. Rev. A 77, 043834 (2008).
[17] H. E. Guilbert and D. J. Gauthier, “Enhancing Heralding Efficiency
and Biphoton Rate in Type-I Spontaneous Parametric Down-Conversion,”
IEEE. J. Sel. Topics Quantum Electon. 21, 6400610 (2015).

17

